[Letter 1]


MB: no numbering in the original
2 handwritten pages, black ink, unlined paper, letterhead and with coat of arms: “National Coastal Navigation Company - Avenida Rodrigues Alves, 303-331 - @(Rio de Janeiro) - On board the Itapagé” On board the [ship] Itapagé - Sunday evening - [February 6]


Dear &(Tânia) and &(Tamara) Imagine that only today, at 4:30 p.m., we left @(Santos). Tomorrow morning we will arrive at @(Rio), and on Tuesday afternoon we should continue. The Itapagé is more or less like the Fathör, the ship we came to Brazil on. The Itapagé is very clean, has good food, few passengers, and so far the ship has not been rocking much. We sleep two in each cabin. Nice and clean cabins. Did you receive my lines from @(Santos)? We will arrive in @(Recife) no later than the 15th of this month. Could you send me the address of &(Mamma) and &(Mischa)? After all, I need to write to them from time to time. I hope that everything is well with you and &(Tamara). For today, my warm hugs and kisses. All the best to &(Tamara) and all the acquaintances. Your &(Brauni)



Letter 2 (cont. letter 1)
MB: no numbering in the original
1 handwritten page, black ink, unlined paper, no letterhead


in Rio [de Janeiro] [RJ] - Monday night - [February 7th]
Our ship docked today at the @(Rio) pier, shortly after 9am. It's not exactly raining, but the whole day was a bit dark, with the sky covered in clouds. We took a few trips to several beaches, and even with the overcast sky it was quite hot. It's a shame we couldn't see the mountain tops. Tomorrow afternoon, we should be heading to @(Vitória). Hugs and kisses from the heart. Yours &(Brauni). (Please save the stamp.)


Letter 3
MB: no numbering in the original
3 handwritten pages, black ink, unlined paper, letterhead and with coat of arms: “National Coastal Navigation Company - Avenida Rodrigues Alves, 303 / 331 - Rio de Janeiro - Onboard the Ita_____” Onboard the [ship] Itapagé - Wednesday morning - [February 9]


Dear &(Tatiana) and &(Tamara).
Today at noon we will arrive in @(Vitória), the capital of @(Espírito Santo). The trip so far has been going very well and we are all in good spirits. Leaving @(Rio) was especially beautiful. I believe that when you arrive from the North or go this way, the view of Rio is much more beautiful than coming from the South. It's a shame that in @(Rio), apart from the city center, I didn't get to see much of anything. To begin with, there wasn't much time and then I didn't have a guide. I couldn't find my way around, and even though people were very willing to give you information, you can't always ask questions. In @(Rio), I ran into &(Blois) by chance (he was also in a hurry) and &(Alberto Lazzoli), who worked with me on &(Paramount). Now we are on the high seas. All around, there is only water. Before, you could constantly see, more or less clearly, a hill, a hill or a long beach! The ship is now full of passengers. Many people boarded the @(Rio). Our cabin is also full now. It is a cabin with three beds. We went to the @(Rio) with an empty bed. The same thing happens to my colleagues in the other cabin.
How are you? Are you healthy? What is Tamara doing? Does she play a lot and walk around the garden? What's going on with school? Has Dona Lenira sorted out the situation with the kindergarten yet? Please call her and tell her that I'm fine, that I send my best wishes to her and everyone at the Children's Library. Likewise, I ask that you call Mario and tell him that our trip so far has been perfect, that we are all in good spirits and that I send him hugs. Also give my regards to Paulo [Ribeiro Magalhães]), his family and your new students! Have you received the missing 300 mil-réis yet? Is everything okay with that? Please contact Mario or Paulo if you encounter any difficulties. Is there anything new at home? What is the Popular Choir doing? What are the singers saying about the new conductor? Please greet everyone for me!
For today, my best wishes, hugs and lots of kisses to both of you.
Your old man &(Martin).


Letter 4
MB: no numbering in the original
3 handwritten pages, black ink, unlined paper, letterhead and with
coat of arms: “National Coastal Navigation Company - Rodrigues Alves Avenue, 303 / 331 - @(Rio de Janeiro) - Onboard the Ita_____”


My dear &(Tatiana),
Yesterday I saw one of the most beautiful natural landscapes: the entrance to @(Vitória). It is difficult to describe how unique the image is. The mouth of the river immediately emerges from the sea. It is hard to believe, because at first you can see nothing of a city, only an arm of the sea similar to a river. Fantastic shapes of hills, gentle elevations, large stone walls and green precipices, covered with plantations or forests. Further back, even higher mountain ranges. The arm of the sea continues to wind inland, once wider, then narrow again, so that the ship can barely pass. Little by little, small houses appear on the left and right, often built close to the rock, others almost in the water or on steep slopes. Mountains of unusual shapes, some very reminiscent of @(Sugarloaf Mountain) in @(Rio). Finally, the river or sea arm widens a little, and you can see the walls of the quay and the city approaching, spread out widely on hills and cliffs. Small old houses alternate with new ones that are not very high - some slopes are covered to the top with small huts.
Instead of arriving at 12:00 as planned, we only arrived at about 14:00. During the whole trip from @(Rio) we had a headwind and a headwind. We only stopped for two hours. We went ashore and I posted a letter to you. A short ride on the electric tram and our short stop was soon over. The heat was remarkable. People in the cafes drank coconut water as naturally as we drank tea. At 16:00 promptly the ship weighed anchor. The departure was again as beautiful as the arrival. I wish you could see the wonderful beauty of this landscape. I had the impression that the whole State of @(Espírito Santo) must be unique, because everywhere you see mountain shapes that cannot be compared with any other. Ever further in the background, a long and high mass of mountains. We are at sea. Gradually the wonderful shapes disappear, until finally it gets dark. We should reach Bahia in 48 hours. The trip is calm and pleasant, only the heat, sometimes, is unpleasant. Time passes so quickly... Tomorrow it will be a week since I left home. I am attaching a newspaper clipping, please keep it safe.
How are you and what are you doing &(Tamara)? I hope to find a letter from you in @(Recife).
I'll write a few more lines quickly, since we should be arriving in @(Bahia) early tomorrow. Today Pacheco showed me some small dictionaries that he bought in @(São Paulo), at @(Livraria Edanee), @(Rua São Bento) - near @(Largo de São Bento). They are small books with about twelve thousand words, in red, and cost between 4 and 5$000. If possible, I ask that you buy the German-Portuguese and vice-versa versions for me, and send them as soon as possible to @(Recife)!
We still have a calm voyage, strong headwind but calm sea! There is more than enough to eat on the ship. From 6-9am, coffee or tea; at 11:50am, lunch; at 2:50pm, tea; at 6pm, dessert; and at 9pm, coffee or tea again. You can see that we cannot die of hunger here! For today, many hugs and kisses for you and &(Tamara). Send my regards to all your acquaintances! Yours &(Brauni).


Letter 5 (cont. letter 4)
MB: no numbering in the original
1 handwritten page, black ink, unlined paper, no letterhead
[Itapagé ship] - Friday - [February 11]
We arrived at @(Bahia) today at 9am.
Hugs and kisses from the heart.


Letter 6
MB: no numbering in the original
4 handwritten pages, black ink, unlined paper, no letterhead
[ship] Itapagé - Friday afternoon - 11 [February]


Dear Tatiana and Tamara,
Today, at 9:30 a.m., we landed. The trip from Vitoria to Salvador was therefore quicker than expected. We spent the day in the city. At 7 p.m. we left the port again and tomorrow afternoon we should arrive in @(Maceió). @(Salvador) is really a beautiful city and is very well situated. The entrance to the bay is fascinating. We slowly approached the land which, as far as one can see, rises gently from the beach to a height of 10-30 meters. The coconut trees are native to the land: here they are at home and dominate the entire landscape. Nowhere else have I seen such an extensive open bay. With a dark green color, the bay is as wide as a large rounded lake.
The lower city - that is, the part situated by the sea - did not give me the impression of poverty that is often mentioned. It is true that I did not get to see much of it. In any case, the old houses with three, four or five floors are well preserved. As in all of Salvador, the beautiful, well-preserved buildings from the 17th and 18th centuries dominate, giving it a unique and distinctive appearance. All the facades of the houses have many high windows, probably to allow fresh air to enter, as it is very hot. The lower third of these windows is almost always decorated with beautifully shaped iron grilles. We went up to the upper city in the famous elevator. I estimate that the height is about 40-50 meters. However, as soon as you enter, you have to get out, as you are already at the top of the city. The view from here over the wide bay is especially beautiful.
We visited several churches, because the city of Salvador and its surroundings alone has more than 350 churches with beautiful paintings, images and other ornaments, often of great artistic value. There really is no street without one or more churches, especially in the best and most beautiful areas of the city. It is admirable how richly decorated these churches are, even more so when compared to those in São Paulo. Most of the altars are decorated with gold, and entire walls are richly decorated with wooden figures. The ceilings of the churches often have a golden glow or a well-executed old painting. It is a surprising wealth that must only be found in Salvador. Life on the streets is also very different from what we imagine. There are certainly many black people living here, but they do not dominate the streetscape and it is rare to see a typical black figure. It is possible that there are parts of the city where only black people live. There are many mixed-race people, who tend to have white skin rather than black skin. During the few hours we spent there, I didn't get to see much. I mainly saw the beautiful beachside neighborhood of Villas, on the edge of the city. However, in a few months, on our return trip, before returning home, we will stay here a little longer. Except for the differences in landscape and typical buildings, the lives of the people here and in São Paulo are not very different: radio and cinema, as well as modern means of transportation and communication, help and are partly responsible for the rapid disappearance of the characteristics of each state and city. It is a pity that I cannot describe these beautiful images and impressions of my trip more vividly. I hope, however, that you get some idea from what I have related.
I must remind you once again that you should talk to &(Mischa) or the landlord or someone else about the roof of our house. Right now the damage is still easy to repair. Later, on the contrary, bigger repairs will be necessary. If I remember correctly, first you should check the smoke outlet, where it looks like some tiles are broken. Then, over the bathroom entrance, where there also looks like there are some loose tiles. In the garage, in several places: over the ping-pong table and over the toilet there must be many broken tiles.
Please telephone &(Suzi) - the telephone number is on the ticket for &(Lucy). Send her best wishes and warm thanks for dropping by at the railway station, tell her I am very well and ask her about the matter of my naturalization. She has agreed to arrange this for me. Don't forget to speak to &(Paulo Magalhães) so that you don't both happen to be undertaking the same job by chance.
For today my warm hugs and wishes, kisses from the heart. Kiss &(Tamara) for me. All the best. Hugs to &(Mamma) and all the &(Kipmans).
Your &(Brauni)


Letter 7
MB: no numbering in the original
2 handwritten pages, black ink, unlined paper, no letterhead
@(Recife) [PE] - Sunday - February 13th
Dear &(Tatiana)
Yesterday I was unable to deliver your letter to @(Maceió), because our ship docked too far from the pier. It didn't stay long and when it left, it was already late at night. This morning we arrived in Recife. At approximately 11:30 a.m. we went ashore. The trip was relatively good and beautiful. Even so, I am happy that we are finally on dry land. We will stay here for about two weeks for now. I can still feel the rocking of the ship all over my body, but I have always been in good spirits and now I am in perfect order. Today is exactly one week since we left @(Santos): the beginning is done! That's all for today. Now our work will begin. Warmest hugs and kisses, your &(Brauni).


Letter 8
MB: no numbering in the original
4 handwritten pages, black ink, unlined paper, with circular coat of arms on the right: “Air France - Brazil”
@(Recife) [PE] - Wednesday - February 16th
Dear &(Tatiana) and &(Tamara)
Yesterday I received your letter. Thank you very much. If saying goodbye to you was very difficult, it is even more so now, precisely when you should not be alone at all and need help from all sides. But we must not think about the most unpleasant things and let ourselves be carried away by these currents of thought. I do not feel at all well knowing that you harbor such gloomy thoughts! May God grant that you are better now. Tamara will soon feel better, and these 5-6 months will pass very quickly.
My relationship with my colleagues is normal. It could be better, but it is not unpleasant at all. As for money, it could also be better than it is. My three colleagues can spend all the money they earn. Besides, they have never earned as much as they do now. I, on the other hand, am earning less overall than I did in São Paulo. And I have many more expenses. The heat here at this time of year is so intense that I need a clean shirt every day. My suits get dirty quickly. I can't wear my blue suit because of the heat, and I can barely wear my gray one. Washing clothes and brushing the suits is quite expensive, precisely because there is so much to wash. A pack of cigarettes a day, the occasional coffee or soft drink, also the postage, shoe polishing, haircuts, tram rides, etc. All together, it adds up to much more than the $3,300 that I should spend as a daily allowance with my $100,000 a month. But don't worry about this, somehow everything will work out.
Please hug &(Ella) for me. I am very happy that she is by your side, I am very grateful to her. Of course, it is much better for &(Tamara) to go to school in @(Vila Mariana) than not to go to any at all. Please hug Nenê for me. How about if you take Nenê with you sometimes when you go to pick up Tamara? Maybe that way she will feel a little safer. If Nenê is afraid of the tram, you can walk from school to our house. I actually think it is even faster on foot than by tram. Even walking slowly, it does not take half an hour. Please check the city map. Maybe you can reach some agreement with &(Nenê). In the meantime, I hope you have received the 300$000. As I said, you should have spoken on the phone with the accountant &(Caldora) of &(Parques Infantilis) first, and if that did not help, with &(Mário) or &(Paulo). You have &(Caldora)'s phone number, right? I hope everything is in order now!!!
It's a shame that the green parakeet died, but there are still three of this species. It would be worse if it were the green parakeet from here. Please explain to Nenê how she should feed the birds, in case she can't do it.
We have been here for a few days now and I have already found myself a bit warm. The heat is noticeable but not unpleasant. There is almost always wind and the weather is very constant. In @(São Paulo) I sometimes felt the heat stronger and more penetrating than I feel here. The city is very clean and tidy, there are good tram connections to all sides. Everyone has a
They are extremely kind and helpful. We are staying in a first-class hotel, with impeccable conditions and services. There are many beautiful coconut trees growing everywhere. For now, we will stay here, trying to arrange some details. Later, we will go on excursions to the interior and neighboring states. I seriously ask you not to worry if my news does not arrive as regularly as it has been up to now. Of course, I will write constantly, but the connection from the interior may take a long time. I ask that you start sending letters to the address of this hotel: @(Hotel Central) - @(Av. Manoel Borba) - @(Recife). If we leave here, the letters will be forwarded or one of us will come and pick them up. It seems more convenient to me than by poste restante, which can easily cause difficulties and the mail can only be picked up upon presentation of an identity card.
Dear Tânia, please call &(Mário) and send me my warm greetings. Tell him we had a wonderful trip and that we arrived safely in @(Recife) on Sunday. We were welcomed everywhere with open arms thanks to &(Mário)'s letters of recommendation. The [recording] machines are here at the Hotel for now. In the first few days we had to contact the authorities, but yesterday we heard some maracatus (dance with music - sung) and a loa. We are going to record everything, because it is interesting. Yesterday for the first time we made good contacts (in the musical sense) with some singers, who will sing: a man of the people who knows several old maracatus. He will sing for us. The first step has been taken! In any case, I believe we will get a lot of music here. More than in the city, where it is incredibly difficult to find the right manifestation. We saw the dances about an hour's drive from the city. We are going to work among the people as quickly as possible. Next week we should hear torés. For now, this is all I ask you to communicate to &(Mário).
How are you? You've been to the doctor again and what did he say? What are your students doing and how is it going with &(Waldemar)? Please send him a hug. Hugs to &(Paulo) and his wife too. When do you plan on calling &(Rina)? Please hug everyone for me.
The beauty of @(Recife) is the arms of the sea and a river that cross the city. Long, wide bridges dominate the landscape. The street vendors are also interesting: on their shoulders, a pole with baskets hanging from the ends tied to ropes that almost touch the ground. On the baskets, the merchandise being sold.
Please, I ask you to send kisses to Tamara for me, tell her that she must obey you and be good. My affectionate hugs and kisses, your old &(Brauni).




Letter 9
MB: no numbering in the original
3 handwritten pages, black ink, unlined paper, letterhead:
On the left: “@(Hotel Central) - @(Avenida Manoel Borba), 209 - Teleg. End.
HOTOEN - Telep. 2051-2052-2053 - @(Recife) - @(Pernambuco) - @(Brazil); on the right:
“Via Aérea”, undated
[Recife - PE - Sunday - February 20]


Dear &(Tânia) and &(Tamara),
How are you? How are you feeling? And what are you doing &(Tamara)?
Everything is fine with me, I am healthy. We are still in @(Recife), because in the last few days we have made several good contacts, so there is still a lot to work on here. In the last few days, we have recorded and written down several interesting songs. Years ago, piano transporters used to work in the following way: depending on the weight of the instrument, 6-8 to ten men would carry the piano on their heads and walk in synchronized steps through the streets - in the past, not as flat as today. At that time, only a rich man could afford a piano, or rather, only a few of the rich bought a piano. To pay homage to the illustrious man and to coordinate the simultaneous steps, people would sing. The journey often took an hour or more. So it was possible to sing a lot. In this way, a number of songs were created that are no longer sung today, since pianos are now transported by trucks. And some people still remember these songs. We managed to record several of them. Soon, these melodies will be completely forgotten around here.
Other work songs are those of the bakers. These too are no longer sung today, because singing used to be associated with manual work, and nowadays machines do away with it. There are still a few bakers who remember the songs, but so far we haven't found anything interesting. Other bakers will come on Monday. Perhaps they will remember these old songs better, which are no longer sung today. There are also stone workers near the city who are known for the songs they sing while working. It is easier for us now, because we have already made contact and the word has spread throughout the city that we are collecting songs from the people. The people of the people then come, many of them old, some of whom you wouldn't think could sing.
This way, time passes more quickly for me. Recording and writing down the songs demands a lot of attention and time. As I have already written, we are in a very clean and very good hotel, with perfect service and attention. The heat, however, is much stronger than in São Paulo. The heat is not very unpleasant, or rather, it is a constant heat. You sweat all day long. And it is great that a refreshing breeze almost always comes from the nearby sea. I think that this is the only reason why it is possible to endure this climate so well. The city of Recife has about five hundred thousand inhabitants. Life is the same as in other cities. Almost all the men wear light white suits. Many without hats. I have not needed to wear a hat either. Almost all the streets are tree-lined, which gives us a great impression. So far I have not taken any photos. I prefer to leave that for the countryside, where there are much more interesting aspects to photograph. From what I have noticed in the surrounding area, urban life does not extend very far. The blacks and mulattos on the outskirts of the city live in mud huts, which from the outside may look very romantic with their thatched roofs, a small garden of flowers and vegetables attached, and the beautiful coconut trees at the side or back - but living inside them cannot be very comfortable. Usually one or two small rooms, and often a large family. And
Yet these people seem to live very contentedly. They know no other reality. In the city, it is not blacks who predominate, but very light-skinned mulattos, who are generally considered to be very dark-skinned whites. A little further out of the city, you see more dark-skinned people. Almost never, blacks at all.
Today marks a week since we arrived here. We left @(Santos) fourteen days ago - and we've been home for half a month. It seems like it was only yesterday that I left home, time flies so quickly. I forgot to say something. It's this: please don't lend anything of my belongings. If someone says I promised something, tell them that you don't know anything, you don't know where I put it and that you need to write to me first. Don't give them any sheet music. If by chance &(Autuori) wants something, tell him that he must first return the orchestral scores of Verklärten Nach by &(Schöenberg) and Kleine Nachtmusik by &(Mozart) (individual parts and score). If he needs it, I can lend it to him again. But please don't lend anything.
Are your singing students still coming? Are they studying well? Please hug everyone for me. Ask them to greet everyone in the &(Popular Choir) for me. I hope everyone is continuing.
Are all my orchids in their old places? One of them must be in full bloom. I counted sixteen buds. It is planted in the ground next to the chicken pen, on the lawn under the parrot tree. Are all the birds alive? &(Rina) must be with you by now, right? Is little &(Ludmila) there too? And &(Tamara), is she going to school again? Is she talking better yet? Can she get dressed and use the potty by herself? She could eat by herself when she wanted to. Soon she will be able to help you a little. Please kiss and hug Tamara for me. Also to all relatives and friends, best wishes and hugs. Have you decided which hospital you are going to? Have you been to the doctor again? For today, the most affectionate hugs and kisses, your old &(Brauni)






Letter 10
MB: no numbering in the original
4 handwritten pages, black ink, unlined paper, with circular coat of arms:
“Air France - Brazil”
@(Recife) [PE] - [Sunday] - February 27th
Dear Tatiana,
I am anxiously awaiting news from you. So far I have only received one airmail, and that was more than eight days ago. We stayed longer in @(Recife) than expected, as there was a lot of work to do. By the end of this week, that is, by the first few days of next month, we hope, we will have completed the work here and will travel to the interior of Pernambuco or to @(Paraíba). Everything will be decided in the coming days. As soon as I know something for sure, I will write to you immediately.
So far, everything is going very well for me. I am healthy and in good spirits. I have had a lot of work to do in the last few days. From early morning until late at night, I have been on the move, looking for singers or something useful, or recording songs on the album. In this way, the days pass very quickly.
How are you? How are you feeling? What does the doctor say? Is everything okay? When are you going to the hospital? May God grant that everything goes well and quickly! At home everything must be as usual. What are you doing and how is my dear &(Tamara)? &(Lenira) still hasn't shown up or given any news about &(Tamara)'s kindergarten? Does Tamara go to school every day in @(Vila Mariana)? Is &(Ella) still with you or has &(Rina) already arrived from @(Bragança)? How is &(Tamara) getting along with &(Ella) or &(Rina)? At school &(Tamara) must learn to talk faster. Is &(Tamara) riding her bike yet? Kiss and hug &(Tamara) for me. How are &(Mamma), &(Mischa) and &(Katja)?
I hope everyone is well. Please hug everyone for me and also &(Dima) and &(Rina). Are all the birds alive? There are many birds here and almost every house has cages hanging with birds. I often stand still and watch the little singers. I recently saw a yellow and black bird, about the size of our black bird, that sang in tune like a flute. In tones and semitones, rising and falling, the notes linked with glissandos in sequence, like on a woodwind instrument. Very interesting! So far I have not bought any birds, because I could not take them with me, nor send them to @(São Paulo). I have seen several beautiful orchids for sale on the streets, but I have not bought anything because I want to collect the plants myself when possible. When we travel to the countryside, I will probably have many opportunities to look for orchids.
As for the addressing of your letters, I think it would be better to send them by poste restante, because when we leave here there will be no certainty as to when either of us will be able to return, and the hotel cannot be trusted to forward the letters. The people at the post office are there for that very purpose.
Today is Carnival Sunday and people are completely crazy in the streets. Everyone is dancing and singing the latest Carnival hits. There is a loudspeaker on every corner. The blacks and mixed-race people in particular are excited and it is amazing what these people can physically endure. They dance for hours, up and down, without getting tired. This is practically the only joy they can share. In the city, in the upper social classes, white skin predominates. You see many blond people and light-colored, blue eyes. We are staying on a busy street, from where you can hear all the noise. In this respect, you are a little better off there in São Paulo, because our little house is a little out of the way.
A few days ago I had an accident: my front tooth broke. I had to go to the dentist and he said that everything would be ready by Wednesday. The damage has gotten to such a point that the complete work will now cost $850,000, which I will borrow from here for now. On the other hand, I am glad that I had to do this, because the tooth was getting darker and worse every day.
I ask you to call &(Mário) and tell him the following: (Don't tell anyone else. It's not really a secret, but it should stay between us) We recorded a complete xango on disk. For you: xango is a type of pantheistic cult of worship of gods, of African origin, performed in a black language. It is almost always sung by a soloist, a choir in response - all monodic - and danced, along with the religious acts. We had just arrived in @(Recife), when the police prohibited the practice of xango in the entire state of @(Pernambuco). The police confiscated all the objects involved in the cult. So, when we went to the police station, there was a large quantity of these objects. After consulting with the police chief, he allowed us to choose - free of charge for the &(São Paulo Department of Culture) - whatever we wanted from among the objects. We chose and took seventeen beautiful musical instruments - the best - in addition to ten images (statues of saints) and a number of miscellaneous objects. We are now busy selecting, numbering and packing the objects, which is a lot of work. &(Saia) spent one night in @(Paraíba) and brought news that there is great interest in our Mission there, that they are finding a lot of work for us, that there is much interesting to record, and that there will possibly be help from people in the Government. At the end of this week we will travel there or to the interior of @(Pernambuco), if &(Mário Mello) can find the torés to record. Also tell &(Mário) that when I bit the pulp of a coconut, I hit a piece of the shell and lost a tooth. The dentist will have to do several root treatments and a bridge, which will cost 850$000. I will try to settle this problem with &(Mário) when I return to @(São Paulo). The money, I took with &(Get out).
I hope I haven't forgotten to tell you anything. I'm very much with you in my thoughts and I always think about what you're doing. Soon the first month of our trip will have passed. For today, I ask you to greet everyone I know.
My warmest hugs and all the best with lots of kisses. Your old &(Martin).






Letter 11
MB: no numbering in the original
2 handwritten pages, black ink, unlined paper, letterhead:
On the left: “Hotel Central - Avenida Manoel Borba, 209 - Teleg. Address HOTOEN - Telep. 2051-2052-2053 - Recife - Pernambuco - Brazil; on the right: “Via Aérea”
Recife [PE] - Friday - 4th [March]


Dear Tatiana,
Tomorrow, at the latest the day after tomorrow, we will travel for a week to ten days to the interior of Pernambuco. Before we leave, I want to write you a few lines so that you can rest easy, because it will be difficult to send letters from the interior. So please don't worry if you don't hear from me for 10-14 days. A trip like this cannot be determined by a specific day. If we find something interesting, we will stay longer. There must still be dances and music of the people there that are not influenced by the city. The &(state interventor) has put at our disposal a large car with a driver, so that we will be well driven and protected everywhere. And the state of @(Pernambuco) is large. It was very good to have met &(Mr. Bosch) here. Since we had spoken before my trip, I thought that &(Bosch) lived in @(Bahia), so I didn't bother to look for him. One of these days a gentleman wanted to talk to me. It was &(Mr. Bosch). He happened to read my name in the newspaper. Yesterday we were together, today again for half an hour, and in the evening we will have dinner together. The mail question has now been solved brilliantly. Please address all future letters thus: my name, P.O. Box 38 - @(Recife). This is &(Mr. Bosch)'s P.O. Box. He will keep my letters and, if there is an opportunity, forward them. It is easier to reach us from here than from @(São Paulo) directly. &(Mr. Bosch) promised to provide everything necessary and I have great confidence in him. After the trip to the interior we will stay a few more days in @(Recife), and then we will go to @(North). I am anxious for you. I have received only one letter from you since I left @(São Paulo), an airmail letter by postal mail. Did you also write to the hotel? Now it will be difficult to write to you too, perhaps only a few words. I hope with all my heart that you are feeling well and that everything goes smoothly. Today marks exactly one month since we left @(São Paulo). Today is also Friday. Please, I ask you to hug and kiss &(Tamara) often for me. Does she still remember me? Does she talk about me from time to time? Also say hello to &(Coral Popular); rehearsals should have started again by now. The first concert of the year that &(Coral Popular) will perform is next month. I sent a choral piece of mine via &(Mário) to &(Coral Popular), perhaps it can still be used for the next concert. Please say hello to all friends and acquaintances. Once again, my best wishes
best wishes, hugs and lots of kisses for you. Yours &(Brauni).


Letter 12 (cont. letter 11)
MB: no numbering in the original
1 handwritten page, black ink, unlined paper, no letterhead
[Recife - PE] - Saturday morning - [March 5th]


Last night, our trip to the countryside was postponed again. We will only leave on Monday morning. Anyway, there is a lot to work on here too.
I haven't had any luck with my suits. It's so hot here that I only feel comfortable in a light-colored suit. The gray one is too hot, let alone the blue one. I should have left this one at home. It's constantly hot, but I don't suffer from it. However, in any closed-fitting clothing, you sweat all day. I'm better with shirts, but I have to change them every day. Sometimes I have to change them during the day too. At least I brought plenty of shirts.
I ask you again, dear &(Tânia), not to worry if for a few days - up to fourteen days - you do not hear from me. Write, from now on, to: MB - P.O. Box 38 - @(Recife). I hope to hear from you when I return from the interior.
Once again, my most tender hugs and kisses. Your old &(Brauni).


Letter 13
MB: no numbering in the original
2 handwritten pages, black ink, music paper with staves around
far away
Tacaratu [PE] - Thursday - 10th [March]


Dear Tatiana,
Thank you for your letter of February 21st, which unfortunately I only received on Monday of this week. The post office is not exactly the fastest. I received the small dictionaries along with your letter, all in perfect condition. Thank you very much.
We left @(Recife) on Tuesday at 6am on the train to meet the Indians. The region around @(Recife) is very varied, everything is green. After an hour's train ride, the vegetation becomes increasingly sparse and finally disappears almost completely. We are then in the #sertão do Norte, the arid region. Rain is often absent for months and not infrequently for years. Everything dries up. The leaves fall from the trees, the plants and flowers wither, practically nothing green. For hours you travel by train through dry areas. To the right and to the left, as far as you can see, a low forest without leaves - like in Europe in winter. And yet this region must be one of the most fertile - when it rains. It makes a desolate impression. The only species of plant that still grows more or less here is a type of cactus, which we also have at home, with fan-shaped leaves. Large fields are regularly planted with this. The leaves are cut, the thorns are separated, and the cattle feed is ready. There is incredible poverty here.
Around 4pm we arrived at @(Barão do Rio Branco), the penultimate station on the train line called @(Central). A small town, situated on the side of a hill. A very beautiful landscape. After a few hours of stopping, we continued our journey by truck - due to the heavy dust here it is more pleasant to travel at night. We left promptly at 6pm. At night, and before sunset, a picture of rare beauty: the stars were shining, the half moon was slowly descending until it disappeared later. The hills were getting darker and darker. A very pleasant climate.
Again, near and far, a low forest with almost no leaves. It rained here a few days ago. You can see all the trees with little buds ready to bloom. When it rains, the landscape changes completely in just a week. At least, that's what we were told. Everything turns green and blooms. For hours, the car drives along a very good highway at first. In the early hours of the morning it got cooler. A car problem delayed us for an hour and a half, so that we only arrived here at @(Tacaratu), another small town, at 5 a.m. The indigenous village is about an hour's drive from here. We are now in the domain of &(Lampião) - the famous bandit leader. In recent years, he has not committed any more crimes. Everyone is quiet about him, but everyone talks about him. Only yesterday we recorded some albums - folk music. Today we were supposed to go see the Indians, but the car we ordered didn't arrive. So we will have to go tomorrow. Here in the interior it is not easy with the means of transport. In this way, we will only meet the Indians tomorrow, if the car comes at all. The Indians here are no longer savages: they are almost nicer than some of the other natives. Today we will have to record some songs. I must conclude. All the best, warm hugs and kisses to you and to &(Tamara).
Your &(Brauni).


Letter 14
MB: no numbering in the original
3 handwritten pages, black ink, unlined paper, no letterhead
@(Tacaratu) [PE] - Saturday - March 12
Since I still have some time, I want to write you a few lines. Please don't worry about money. I'm doing well. If I had more, I would spend more. I eat as much as I want and live as well as one can live here. I certainly don't miss anything. If I need more money, I can borrow it with &(Exit) - as in the case of the dentist - and I'll pay you 850$000. So far, I haven't seen anything exceptional that I would want to buy. If I need something, I'll write to you. So please, don't worry. I'm not going through any hardship, considering the conditions. Here, for example, in the interior, in the deep #backlands, there's a lot missing from what we're used to. But life here is like this: everything is still primitive, you can't have anything better. I ask you: don't send me money, unless I expressly ask for it. Also, don't send me the white linen suit. Here it would be destroyed in a few weeks. The dictionaries are correct. I didn't know the exact price: it's possible that each one costs $3,500. I received both in perfect condition. In my opinion, in order to speak to &(Mário), it's best to call the office - at 2:00 p.m. or after 4:00 p.m. Ask him what's the best way to reach him. You'll probably have to try a few times, as this line is quite busy. My salary arrived late. So the one you received just before Carnival is not for March, but for February. It took a while for the money to arrive... Thank God, everything is in order now. What does &(Tamara) think of the new kindergarten? How is she getting used to the language? Please call &(Dona Lenira), send her my warmest regards to everyone, and ask her how the children's choir is arranged, if there is a new teacher and who it is. Also ask &(Tamara) about the kindergarten. In my opinion, it would be good if &(Tamara) went there. &(Lenira) will certainly be able to arrange everything easily. Now &(Rina) and &(Ludmila) should be there with you. It gives me great comfort to know that you are feeling well and that the doctor thinks everything is in order and that you are confident. Please do not send me pressed orchids in these mailing conditions, especially now that we are going further to the @(North) and that we will be even further away. Please also greet all friends and acquaintances. About the &(Popular Choir), what are the singers doing? What does the &(Popular Choir) do? For now, for you and &(Tamara) my most tender hugs and kisses, all the best.
Your &(Brauni).
Please send me &(Glass)'s address!




Letter 15 (cont. letter 14)
MB: no numbering in the original
2 handwritten pages, black ink, unlined paper, no letterhead


@(Baron of Rio Branco) [PE] - [Tuesday] - March 15th
Yesterday at 4:00 p.m., we left Tacaratu in a truck. We arrived late at night in a village - Espírito Santo - where we spent the night badly and quickly. This morning, we continued on to here, arriving at noon. The train passes through here and tomorrow we will take it to Recife, where we will stay a few more days, and then we will continue on to Paraíba. I am quite tired after this ten-hour trip by truck. At first, the road was not good; then it got better and better and in the last few hours it was quite good. Please call &(Mário): everything is fine with us, with a lot of work. Interestingly, we recorded on CD in the #backlands: beaches, torés with the Indians (caboclinhos); lots of emboladas, toadas, coconuts, roda, martelos, country songs and rojão. We were not in @(Águas Belas). In @(Recife), it is likely that we will still be able to record another xangô. After a few days in @(Recife) to organize the most necessary things, we will continue to @(Paraíba). There is a lot of unused land here, large expanses, with wonderful valleys and very beautiful landscapes. Did you receive all my previous news? How are you? What is little &(Tamara) doing? Tomorrow in @(Recife) I will write a few more lines. For today, many kisses and hugs for you and &(Tamara). My tender hugs. Yours &(Brauni).


Letter 16 [cont. letter 14]
MB: no numbering in the original
1 handwritten page, black ink, unlined paper, no letterhead
@(Recife) [PE] - Wednesday night - [March 16]
We have just returned from our trip and I am fine. I only just read in the newspaper about what happened in @(Europe). &(Paulo) did not say anything about my naturalization? Please send my greetings and tell him that I ask him to take care of this matter for me. Later, unforeseen difficulties with my passport will probably arise, since my Austrian visa will not last long. If my naturalization is not progressing, then please seek further information. Miss &(Beinhauer) can easily answer my questions: whether I should go to the German consulate in person or whether the transfer will take place automatically. I hope that in the end we will not have to live as stateless persons. This situation, of course, will not be resolved overnight, but it is good to know how things are going. Please try to find out exactly, as you would if it were for yourself. The gentleman who keeps the letters at the hotel will only be arriving in half an hour. So I do not know if there is a letter from you here. My most tender hugs, kisses. Yours &(Brauni).
I have just received your letter of February 27th. Thank you very much. The mail takes too long. That is all. Once again, hugs and kisses. Yours &(Brauni).




Letter 17
MB: no numbering in the original
2 handwritten pages, black ink, unlined paper, no letterhead


@(Recife) [PE] - Thursday - March 17th
My dear &(Tatiana)
Yesterday, when I arrived from the interior, I received your letter of February 27th. This morning, I sent you a letter written mainly in the interior. Then, I found two letters from you in the post office: a simple one, dated February 19th, in which you ask for news of me, and another airmail, very short, in which good &(Mamma) gave the address. The mail really takes a long time. A simple letter takes at least 10-12 days, which is already too much. In addition, there is postal censorship. We have to deal with this. When I am further away, in the @(North), it will probably get even worse. In the meantime, you must have received my definitive postal address: both for @(Recife) and later, &(Mr. Bosch) will forward all letters to me. If any mail arrives at my home, please open it and send me only the most important things as we had agreed. I was happy to know that you were with &(Paulo). He is one of the few who has always been firm on my side. His way of being may seem a little strange to you, but deep down he is a person of rare integrity, who says exactly what he thinks and expects the same from others. In any case, he likes it when his work, which involves a lot of responsibility, is praised. He always has advice, and you can count on him for any information. And if you disagree with any of his opinions, say so calmly. I know you will soon be arguing, because you both have the same characteristic - you always want and need to be right. &(Paulo)'s wife also makes a very sweet impression. Before I forget: when the orchid with many flowers has finished blooming, please put it back in the same place. Not directly on the ground, but on that kind of Christmas tree pot - just as it was - with the bunch that bloomed towards the fence. Please, I ask you to send &(Botelho)'s address. It may be necessary for you to call and ask &(Cândido) for his address. Send me the address of &(Fabiano Lozano) later. He is in the phone book. If you have the chance, I want to send my regards to both of you. It should be time to pay &(Sul-América) soon. I have had a wish for some time: I once read in the Sunday edition of &(Estado de São Paulo)_, a big advertisement - “Christmas for everyone”. You pay 10-12$000 monthly for ten months, and at Christmas, you receive a big basket full of nice surprises. I have always wanted to participate. You know how Christmas is always for us. Maybe you can find out where this Company is - it used to be in @(Ladeira do Comércio) - and, if you agree, join. Now, our trip to @(Paraíba) will certainly start this Sunday or, at the latest, on Monday. Time flies very quickly. We stayed more than a month in @(Pernambuco). Just for today. All the best, hugs, kisses. Yours &(Martin).


Letter 18 [cont. letter 17]
MB: no numbering in the original
2 handwritten pages, black ink, paper, unlined, unlettered


@(Recife) [PE] - Saturday - March 19
I have several objects with me that I won't need. I'll talk to &(Bosch) today and ask for his help in sending all this useless cargo back to São Paulo. The first photographs I took didn't come out exactly well. It's a shame because they were very interesting images. I was told that it was the film's fault, that it shouldn't be left unused in the camera for too long because it gets damaged. I've had this one in the camera since São Paulo, so for over a month. I'm going to send you everything, and please keep the photos and negatives safe, along with the identification, so that later I can find out what they are. I ask that you enlarge the best photo, which is marked below. I now have a great favor to ask of the good &(Mamma). My pajamas are slowly falling apart. No wonder, they've been in use for several years. I'm very happy with the one &(Mamma) made for me, and it's completely worn out. Would it be possible to ask her to make another pair of pajamas out of the same fabric and send them to me? The measurements could be a little larger than the old man's. I have no preference for the color of the fabric, it doesn't matter. That &(Mamma) can choose. I also ask you to tell me the price of a meter of this fabric. As I write, I have to think a lot about you. It is possible, from your words in the last letter, that your difficult time has already passed. I pray to God that everything has turned out well, and that you will soon be able to walk around freely. May God grant that the child will also be healthy and strong and that it will grow normally. You must have a lot of work. Are you still able to teach? Of course, I am very anxious to hear from you. I hope it will not be like what happened with &(Tamara), where we will have to wait for weeks until the little one decides to come into the world. I am also very curious to know whether it is a boy or a girl. Good &(Mamma) will soon be very busy again and trying hard. I wish you all the best with all my heart. If tomorrow I can get all my useless belongings out of here - &(Bosch) should help me with
This - please keep them safe for me. I am sending along some small dolls for Tamara. I bought them because a poor lady made them with her own hands, and I wanted to help her. I ask you to keep two or three of them for me. Also keep a small basket that the Indians made out of fibers. I also wanted to warn you that here sometimes I have to give my business card to people I don't know and don't trust. If by chance a letter or some other type of writing arrives in which someone asks for some material in my name, please don't give anything without writing to me first. I say this only as a precaution. As I have already written, I have a lot of work and hardly have time to write. I have answered my father and &(Marie). Otherwise, I haven't written to anyone else. It was good for that on board the ship, when I had free time all day. Please greet everyone. Tell &(Tamara) that she should be good and give her a kiss for me. Receive my most intimate wishes, hugs and kisses. Yours &(Brauni)


Letter 19
MB: Letter No. 1
1/3 of a handwritten page, black ink, unlined paper, letterhead:
left: “@(Hotel Central) - @(Avenida Manoel Borba), 209 - Teleg. Address HOTOEN - Telep. 2051-2052-2053 - @(Recife) - @(Pernambuco) - @(Brazil); right:
“By Air”
@(Recife) [PE] - Monday - March 21st
Letter No. 1
My dearest and good &(Tânia)
We are still in @(Recife), because there is much work to be done. Today I spent the whole morning, afternoon and evening transcribing melodies that a singer introduced me to. That is how the days go by. Tomorrow morning, the trip to @(Paraíba) should begin. I am starting this letter now so that it will be ready to be sent, with the new address, when we get there. So, you should wait 10-12 days due to the delays in the mail. If you are not sure whether any of your letters will arrive at my new place of stay, please write to &(Bosch) - P.O. Box 38, @(Recife) - and he will forward everything to me. &(Bosch) is currently traveling. So, I too have not heard from you since I arrived from the interior. Tomorrow, I will sort everything out with the post office here. I suggest that from now on we number our letters. I will start now. This letter is number 1. I am waiting for news from you with great anxiety, especially in these last few days. Day after day, and nothing comes. Every night for weeks now, I have told myself, “Tomorrow the news will come.” Until now, I have waited in fear and agitation.


Letter 20 [cont. letter 19]
MB: cont. Letter No. 1
1/3 of a handwritten page, black ink, unlined paper, letterhead:
On the left: “@(Hotel Central) - @(Avenida Manoel Borba), 209 - Teleg. End.
HOTOEN - Telep. 2051-2052-2053 - @(Recife) - @(Pernambuco) - @(Brazil); on the right:
“By Air”


[Recife - PE] - Tuesday night - March 22nd
Tomorrow, at 5:00 a.m., we will leave by train for Paraíba. This afternoon, I went to the post office to see if there was anything from you. There was nothing. In any case, I will leave my future address here at the post office, that is, poste restante, @(Paraíba). After the post office, I went to &(Bosch)'s house. While I was in the countryside, he had traveled to @(São Paulo) because his mother is very ill. No letter from you has reached &(Bosch) so far. I spoke to a gentleman from the company where &(Bosch) works. As soon as I get to @(Paraíba), I will send him my address and he will forward the correspondence to me for the time being. If possible, I will send these lines tomorrow by airmail. We should arrive at @(Paraíba) at 3:00 p.m., so you should receive this letter this week. Write to me soon then by airmail. I miss you and &(Tamara) very much. Please let me know that everything is fine. I am, as always, very well and healthy. The most tender hugs and kisses. Yours &(Brauni).


Letter 21 [cont. letter 19]
MB: cont. Letter No. 1
1/3 of a handwritten page, black ink, unlined paper, letterhead:
On the left: “@(Hotel Central) - @(Avenida Manoel Borba), 209 - Teleg. End.
HOTOEN - Telep. 2051-2052-2053 - @(Recife) - @(Pernambuco) - @(Brazil); on the right:
“By Air”
@(João Pessoa) [PB] - [Wednesday] - March 23rd
I have just arrived in @(João Pessoa), the capital of @(Paraíba). My address is: MB - @(Parahyba-Hotel), @(João Pessoa). If I leave here, my friends assured me that they would forward all my correspondence. Therefore, do not write to @(Recife) anymore, but here until further notice. We will be here for about twenty days. A more detailed letter will follow in those days. How are you? Are you lost count again? All the best to you. Kisses. Yours &(Brauni).


Letter 22
MB: Letter No. 2
½ handwritten page, black ink, unlined paper, no letterhead
@(Joao Pessoa), @(Parahyba-Hotel) [PB] - [Wednesday] - March 23rd
Letter No. 2
My dear &(Tânia),
In the afternoon I sent you an airmail. I was assured that you would receive this letter by Saturday at the latest. I hope it finds you in good health. I wanted to write to you today at a more leisurely pace, but I am so tired that I prefer to leave it for tomorrow, my eyes are almost closing. So until tomorrow. Many kisses.


Letter 23 [cont. letter 22]
MB: cont. Letter No. 2
2½ handwritten pages, black ink, unlined paper, no letterhead


[Joao Pessoa - PB] - Thursday - March 24th
I slept well and feel refreshed. Today it is raining. Rain is essential here: without rain everything dies; with rain, everything seems to be paradise. But, since in our times there are no more paradises on Earth, the good Lord, at least here in @(Paraíba), made it so that for a few months (4-5), if all goes well, there would be rain and everything would be green, while in the other months, without rain, the soil withers. Then everything dies from the lack of water and the heat, and is, once again, waiting for rain. I thought it would be even hotter here than in @(Recife). To my delight, however, it is much cooler and more pleasant here, perhaps because of the rain. The hotel we are staying at is very good and clean. It must be the best in the area. I haven't seen much of the city yet. We traveled from @(Recife) to @(João Pessoa) by train. First, because that way we didn't have to pay anything, and second, because of our large luggage. According to what I was told, the journey would take four hours by car or bus. By train (it looks a lot like the one from @(Bragança), we traveled a little over seven hours. The distance by train from @(Recife) to here, @(João Pessoa), is two hundred and fifteen kilometers. I liked the way here much more than the one I took through the #backlands of @(Pernambuco). Probably because of the rain that had already fallen, everything was green and budding - a spring atmosphere. During the dry season everything must be as dead as in the #backlands of Pernambuco. Yesterday, about an hour from here, I saw extensive fields covered in yellow flowers. The main product of this region is sugar cane. You travel for hours through sugar cane plantations. Exactly at this time everything is very beautiful, because the vines are growing and they all have a dark green color. These plants here, in favorable weather - that is, with enough rain - grow so much that they can reach a height of two meters or more. People still They grow beans, cassava, corn, and even more for domestic consumption. The landscape we pass through is undulating, generally on a plain. Higher elevations can be seen from time to time in the distance. The numerous mango trees are notable, often with fruits as beautiful as peaches. To this day I have not yet eaten a single mango, and I do not know why. There are also many jackfruit trees (breadfruit tree) 79, whose sweet fruit is very tasty. Sometimes you can see jackfruits for sale in markets in @(São Paulo). They are large fruits. The people from the interior gave me a strong impression of poverty. Usually a very large family lives in a mud hut with a thatched roof. I got the impression that a strong storm would carry one of these huts away. The hut is divided into 2-3 rooms, depending on its size. In general, the men wear only pants and a shirt. The small children, often naked, live in the cramped rooms of these huts; This is how family life unfolds. Without windows. The wooden door, divided into two parts, also serves as a window. The floor is dirt. But thank God, the Government is now seriously committed to intervening, to making itself present here. We work diligently, and where there is good will, there can only be progress. Yesterday, before going to sleep, an idea occurred to me that I will tell you about. If it seems good to you, you should carry it out. We have lived in the same house for years and pay monthly rent. The house wears out and loses value to the owner. Ask the landlord if he would like to sell the house together with the land for monthly payments. In other words, instead of paying rent, we should pay for the house. We would undertake to carry out the necessary renovations. The price should, in my opinion, come to about 30 thousand. That way, in a maximum period of, say, ten years, we would have paid everything off and the beautiful little house would be ours. Naturally, a contract of this nature would have to be drawn up at a notary's office and signed legally. Our neighbor, Mrs. Maria, certainly knows how much our house cost. Since we have already paid five years (?) of rent, we should naturally arrive at a favorable price. You should find out about the current value of the house. Mrs. Brix's husband will certainly know this too. And it is around this value that the sale price and the installments should be agreed upon. I think that it will by no means be more than 40 thousand. If everything is in order in this regard, Paulo could advise you. For the owner, it would be a good deal, because he would recover the money invested with good profits and would no longer have to worry about the house. Since there is plenty of space available, we could later modify the property to our liking. Please try to find out about this. We have waited too long for South America. It would be a coincidence if we were able to buy there. Please say hello to all relatives, friends and acquaintances. All the best. Lots of hugs and kisses. Yours &(Brauni).






Letter 24
There is no MB numbering in the original - [Letter No. 3]
2 handwritten pages, black ink, unlined paper, without letterhead [2nd page: model of the Municipal Public Discotheque Repertoire Sheet, with three staves at the top]


@(Joao Pessoa) @(Parahyba-Hotel) [PB] - Monday - March 28th
My dear &(Tânia).
Since our home address is constant, at least you will receive my letters with some regularity. I received your last letter in @(Recife). It was written on February 27, that is, a month ago. It is not easy to go so long without hearing from you, especially during this period. Please write once, letting me know how long it takes for a letter from me to reach you in @(São Paulo). Thank God, I am doing very well. I told you in a letter that I would send you some of my belongings home. In @(Recife), I did not have the opportunity to do so, but here, before we leave the State, I want to send home everything I do not need. I looked in several stores here and could not find razor blades for my razor anywhere. Could you buy a package and send it to me? I think this can be done in a letter - well wrapped - or in an envelope. But please buy a large package - with ten or twelve sheets, not the small ones with five or six. With a package like this I hope to be able to last until the end of the trip. Please call &(Miranda) &(Nicanor Miranda), the head of the &(Children's Parks), and give him my regards. Tell him that I would like some more - perhaps twenty to thirty - advertising leaflets for the &(Children's Parks). I am referring to a notebook with photographs of the various &(Parks) and of the children in their activities. I had one of these notebooks with me, and they were enthusiastically received everywhere. It was the only advertising material we had for the &(Department of Culture). The &(Interventor) here is enthusiastic about the &(Children's Parks). And the Director of the &(Culture Division) of the &(State of Paraíba) wants to copy the &(Children's Parks) of @(São Paulo).
However, it would be good if &(Nicanor) could get in touch with Mrs. &(Oneyda) &(da Discoteca), since there has already been a request for these pamphlets there. &(Saia) told me that she wrote about it, but the mail takes too long and is also not reliable. We should avoid sending these notebooks by two different means. &(Nicanor) can send me the package to the address above. In any case, it would be good, since &(Mário de Andrade) should still be in @(Rio), for you to call @(Oneyda) after lunch. Give her my regards, tell her that everything is fine here, that we arrived in @(João Pessoa) last week. After the necessary preparations, we can start recording. So far, everything is set: a catarineta ship, caboclinhos, coconuts, catimbós, and a few other interesting songs. Next week we will travel for possibly 8-10 days to the interior of the state. Afterwards, we will return here and stay as long as necessary to collect and record everything possible. @(João Pessoa) is a small town, very well situated on a hill. Close to the sea, you can see from the city below - near and far - the arms of the sea and a river that rises and falls according to the tides. The people of @(João Pessoa) are very friendly and helpful. The city is clean and tidy. I especially liked it here. It is still a little far from the hustle and bustle of the city. People are not in a hurry, the traffic is not so developed. In addition, the streets are incredibly clean: imagine that you hardly see any dirt around here. Lots of palm trees in the surroundings. A quiet and pleasant city. Yesterday, we were at the sea, but unfortunately I could not go in the water because there was no time for it. An indescribably beautiful beach - the entire coast planted with coconut trees - a beautiful image. Here in the city, I am not feeling the heat too much. It is the beginning of the rainy season and the sky is almost always covered with clouds without it raining. At least until today. However, yesterday, at sea, the clouds had disappeared and it was scorching hot. How is everything at home? How are you? What are &(Tamara), &(Mamma) and all the relatives and acquaintances doing? How is &(Nenê)? What is happening with your students? Do they all still attend? What do you think of &(Popular Choir)? Please greet everyone for me! Does &(Tamara) still go to the kindergarten near our house? Has &(Lenira) given any news about you? How is &(Waldemar), your piano student? Please greet him for me! Also give my warm regards to &(Paulo) and his wife! As I said, I am eagerly awaiting news from you! With my warm hugs and kisses. Yours &(Brauni).




Letter 25
MB: Letter No. 4
2 ½ handwritten pages, black ink, unlined paper, no letterhead


@(João Pessoa) [PB] - Tuesday - March 29th
Letter No. 4
My dear &(Tânia).
On Monday I sent you a letter: number 3 - I forgot to number it. I hope you are receiving all my letters, and faster than I am receiving yours. As with my last letter, I have to say again today: I received your last letter in @(Recife) and it was written on February 27th. I sincerely hope that everything is well with you and &(Tamara), that you are both healthy! Naturally, I am very worried about you. In your last letter, you said that you were expecting to give birth soon. Now, a month has passed and I still have no news. You also wrote about my naturalization. Has this case progressed in the meantime? If the police need anything, I have already told them that &(Mr. Salles) would take care of everything for me. &(Mr. Salles) works on the 1st floor of the building on the corner of @(Rua Gusmões) and @(Santa Ephigenia) - everyone knows him there. He was the one who got my first documents and knows my process exactly. You can also call him by phone. I believe there is no telephone on his desk. &(Bosch) visited you in @(São Paulo). Did he tell you how we met in @(Recife)? In the next few days, at least the day after tomorrow, that is, on Friday, we will travel for a week through the interior of @(Paraíba). Please don't worry if you don't hear from me during that time. Writing from the interior is not worth it. As soon as I get back from there, I will send you a letter telling you about the trip. After the trip, we will stay a few more days here in @(João Pessoa) to record a catarineta nau or barca - as they are called here. I have already heard a test [recording] and I had to remember the presentation at @(Parque D. Pedro II). Some songs are identical, others similar and many completely new to me. People sing and dance for 4-5 hours, and all just for the story of the catarineta or barca. Tomorrow we will go to the beach - a fifteen-minute drive from here - to record cocos, a form of song that is danced and sung at the same time. The day after tomorrow, we will have cabocolinhos - that is, a dance of men, usually in indigenous costumes, with danced movements of rare beauty and many spoken, declaimed parts, but almost no singing. There is only a gaita - a type of flute - and a few percussion instruments that accompany the dance. When we return from this trip to the interior, it is likely that we will have to go back there once more, but this time to another region. In the interior, it is still possible to find a lot of pure popular music. Here in the city and surrounding areas, the music is almost completely influenced by the radio with its latest hits. I still remember very well that &(Mário) told me that the catarineta should be sung without any instrumental accompaniment. What would he say if he saw that the boat (a Catarineta ship) here is accompanied by an orchestra, composed of small and large guitars and banjos. In general, the people here sing and dance a lot. Popular dances in which there is naturally a lot of singing and often a lot of talking too. I have already described the remarkably pleasant cleanliness of the city. There are few houses with more than one story. Everyone knows each other. In addition, there is a pleasant freshness in the air and a youthful greenness in the landscape. It seems to me that this, unfortunately, only happens during the rainy season. That's enough for today. Before the trip to the interior I will finish the letter. For now, warm hugs, kisses from your &(Brauni)




Letter 26 [cont. letter 25]
MB: cont. Letter No. 4
½ handwritten page, black ink, unlined paper, no letterhead


[Joao Pessoa - PB] - Thursday - [March 31st]
Yesterday we were at the beach, very close to here, and we recorded cocos on records. Coco is a dance for men and women. A soloist begins to sing, the choir usually responds with the same words; the soloist changes his text, the choir follows. People form a circle and dance around it. In the center, one or more solo dancers. It is always sung. The accompaniment consists of only one type of drum (zabumba) and a ganzá. Often, they beat time with their hands. Yesterday I heard them beat the beat very little with their feet, which they say is often used in coco. Here too the people show remarkable resilience. They dance and sing day and night. Unfortunately, yesterday was a rainy day, and we had to stay confined to around one house. The fishermen, like all the people here, are very helpful and friendly. Musically, most of the cocos were good, some very beautiful. We recorded twenty-five cocos. Tomorrow we will travel inland for a week. Who knows, maybe there will still be time for a letter from you to arrive. I await it with great anxiety.




Letter 27 [cont. letter 25]
MB: cont. Letter No. 4
1 typed page, black ink, unlined paper, no letterhead


[João Pessoa - PB] - Thursday night - [March 31st]
Finally, today a letter from you arrived: the airmail of March 25th. Thank you very much. I feel calmer again. You left me without news for a long time. What is not in this letter will probably be in the next one. &(Tamara) now has a lot to do with &(Ludmila). &(Tamara) is already talking more and better than before? It would be great if &(Tamara) could go to a kindergarten. Why does &(Lenira) promise so much and not keep it? Please send my regards to &(Fructuoso) and &(Nobre). To the first, I sent a card from @(Recife). To &(Nobre), I will write to you in a few days. As for my naturalization, from what &(Salles) told me, I know that all the necessary papers were sent to @(Rio). Fingerprints were taken at the police station, I remember that very well. The 96 criminal records were also done. As far as I know, these are only valid for six or ten months. Therefore, those that went to @(Rio) together with the power of attorney two years ago are no longer valid. All this happened two years ago. Since then, nothing else has been sent to @(Rio), except the application that you typed on typewriter 97. &(Salles) told me that an application is official, and cannot have been lost like any other document. Therefore, it must be available and does not need to be renewed. As for the 500$000, &(Salles) received it for the work he did in arranging the papers and forwarding them. He wrote to all the states here and to the countries in @(Europe) where I was. Naturally, he had some money left over. You did not write me anything about &(Mrs. Rapp). Please, in your next letter, enclose the ones from &(Höller) and &(Varatassi). Please keep the stamps. Write here: @(Parahyba-Hotel), @(João Pessoa). As I said, tomorrow we will be traveling for about a week to the interior. Please greet everyone for me. Receive my best wishes, hugs and
kisses. Your old Brauni.




Letter 28
MB: Letter No. 5
2 handwritten pages, black ink, lined paper, letterhead:
“Parahyba-Hotel / Vidal de Negreiros Square / João Pessoa”
Campina Grande (Paraíba) - [Saturday] - April 2nd
Letter No. 5
Dear Tania.
Yesterday, before @(João Pessoa) left, I received two letters from you. The first was dated March 13th - addressed to @(Recife), and unfortunately only now forwarded - and the second, dated March 27th - so it arrived very quickly. Actually, I didn't want to write from the interior because it must take a long time. However, I now want to inform you of the receipt of your letters. We are only a five-hour drive from @(João Pessoa). Please write to @(Parahyba-Hotel) for now. So far we have had little luck with our correspondence. I hope that this will improve. I have already written to inform you of the receipt of the package from the bookstore and the letters from your father and &(Marie). Regarding the score of &(Mignone's Canção Brasileira), I lent it to &(Fructuoso) along with twenty-eight parts (seven copies of each voice). The parts belong to &(Coral Popula)r, the score is my property. You should ask for it from &(Fructuoso) in my name. You can have the score copied so that mine remains with me. &(Fructuoso) also has a handwritten score of Canções Populares (Pereira), which belongs to me and I ask that they also be returned, in case he no longer needs them. Thank you very much for the greeting from Glass, which I return with all my heart. Thank you also very much for your letter No. 1. I am now calmer again, as it had been almost a month since I had heard from you. You are still at home, so there was the same miscalculation that occurred with &(Tamara). When I return from the countryside - in 10-15 days, and it could also be sooner - I hope there will be some happy and manly news! I want to tell you that you should not ask the doctor for anything unless it is absolutely necessary. The natural path must absolutely be the preferential one. You must be patient and everything will work out. I hope that everything will be fine again with Tamara. Hug her and kiss her often for me! The day finally came when &(Lenira) showed up. This delay with the kindergarten seems a bit strange to me. Please greet her and everyone at &(Children's Library) with all my heart. I miss everyone there! Please call or write to &(Mário) so that he can receive it as soon as possible. Send my regards. We are all well. We traveled last night to the interior of @(Paraíba). The reception in @(João Pessoa) by @(Mário)'s friends could not have been more cordial and attentive than it was. In @(Recife), I wrote down several melodies. When I have time, I will transcribe these songs together with data and interesting aspects about the recorded albums for a book. This is a job I am behind on, because it seems more important to me to collect new melodies and songs than to stand around rewriting what was written in pencil. After all, I can do this later. Now, a week ago, &(Saia) came to say that &(Mário de Andrade) asked him to write an article, a commentary on Xangô for the &(Culture Department), and that I should copy more than forty melodies for this purpose. I rejected this request, because its execution would take too much time, time that I need so much to clean up my notes and mainly to collect more new songs. It seemed impossible to me. In @(João Pessoa), I found a person who can sing me more than forty popular songs. I have already written some, the others I will write down after we return there. I still have praiás and torés in my notebook, which I have not yet managed to clean up. Even with the best of will, I cannot do it. I am now looking for &(Mário) to release me from the work on Xangô. If he thinks that &(Saia) should send an article about it anyway, let him send it without the music, without the musical notes, or at least, instead of forty melodies, only ten, or, at any rate, less than forty. I have so much work to do that I can't even write to anyone but you. As for the salary increase, could you talk to &(Paulo) - congratulate him for me from my heart. Tell him that you heard from &(Lenira) that everyone got a salary increase except me. Ask him what's wrong with me, since I'm not there. Please find out for yourself! Yesterday we had an indescribably beautiful car trip. On both sides, fields of sugar cane about a meter high. Until late at night, I saw the fluttering of fireflies so loud and abundant as I had never seen before. Today is market day here in @(Campina Grande), all the streets of the city are full of vendors. Please call &(Lyra) on a Thursday at 9:00 p.m. and have Mr. Geisselmann called. Give him my regards and best wishes to everyone at &(Frohsinn).
For today, hugs, kisses, everything beautiful. Yours &(Brauni).
Greetings to all relatives and acquaintances!




Letter 29
MB: Letter No. 6
1 handwritten page, black ink, unlined paper, no letterhead
Patos [PB] - [Tuesday] - April 5th


Letter No. 6
Dear Tania,
Yesterday we arrived here in @(Patos), a small and clean city in the middle of the narrow but elongated state of Paraíba. I wrote to you from @(Campina Grande), have you received this letter yet? From @(Campina Grande), we went to a nearby farm, where there are half-erased drawings on large stones. These drawings were probably made by Indians and must be more than
thousand years old. I took some photos there. Here too, you can see the same arid landscape. Everything is dry: earth, rocks, cacti and low plants. We are anxiously awaiting rain. On Monday we left this farm following a good road. At first, the terrain was flat for a long stretch, and then gradually became undulating with hills. Really high mountain ranges passed by us. I felt good about the mountains around me. The landscape is very interesting, but there are also many rocks with little plant growth. After a 4-5 hour drive, we arrived here in @(Patos), where we were received with unusual cordiality and where we will stay for a few days. Today we were at the mayor's farm here, about a two-hour drive away, and witnessed a vaquejada: cowboys in leather clothes on fast horses catch a bull riding alongside the animal. They grab the bull's tail, wrap the end around their hand and throw it to the ground, all at an incredibly fast speed. This requires strength, skill and audacity. When the bull is on the ground, a second cowboy quickly jumps off his horse and ties the animal's feet - the bull is captured. Nowadays this custom is slowly disappearing because by law all properties must be fenced and therefore the animals no longer mix so easily. In the past, farms were not fenced and the animals mixed together. You could only recognize them by their branding. Once a year, the animals were rounded up and separated. It is amazing how these people ride and are bold. When I am writing like this, I have to think of you, of home. What's new? How are you? Lots of hugs and kisses.


Letter 30 [cont. letter 29]
MB: cont. Letter No. 6
2 handwritten pages, black ink, unlined paper, in two columns; 2nd
page, in two columns and written in the Discotheque Repertoire Sheet
Public with three pentagrams at the top


@(Patos) - [Wednesday] - April 6th
There is so much work here that we will stay a few more days to sort everything out. From what I understand, it will probably be another 10-14 days before we return to @(João Pessoa). So that you don't go too long without hearing from me, I will post this letter right here. Please write to let me know how long this letter has been on the way. I was told that a newspaper from @(Recife) takes a whole week to arrive here. If I had imagined that we would be here so long, I would have asked for the letters to be resent. You once said that I could not live without newspapers. I can do without newspapers very well. Here we lead a contemplative life - at 9 pm, only one or two people are on the street. The news from the city arrives a week later. I think there is also a radio and even a piano. The people are kind and helpful. The &(State) is paying all our hotel expenses here and in @(João Pessoa). Personally, I have not gained anything from this, but for our task as a whole, this is a valuable help since our money will not last long. It has been more than two months since I left home, the days and weeks go by so quickly. It seems that I will be away for another four months. If this period also goes by as quickly as it has so far, then it will be fine. Just imagine: in all this time I have not seen an orchid, despite having been in regions where they should be found. In @(Campina Grande), I saw one at the market and bought it for 1$500. A beautiful plant that produces flowers of rare beauty. An acquaintance took it to @(João Pessoa) and will keep it for me until I arrive. I hope to find some more orchids during this trip. If this happens, I intend to send them home from @(João Pessoa). Then carefully place the plants together in an open-air place, preferably in the shade - under the orange tree would be good - but not directly on the ground. It would be good to plant them on a board, a little above the ground, so that slugs and other pests cannot get there so easily. It is important that the plants stay in the same place, and not here today and somewhere else tomorrow. As for replanting them in pots, it would be better to wait until I get back. Perhaps &(Mischa) could make a frame out of the wood from the old birdhouse. The orchids could be left loose on this frame for the time being - one or two plants or leaves could be fixed with a tile. Please do not give away any plants for the time being, keep everything very well. If I still find enough orchids, then I can give some away myself when I get back. If everything continues as it has been, I will not need to give anything, because there will be nothing. If, however, I can send some home, then keep them very well. The plants can be kept close together, but not on top of each other. And they should not be left in standing water either. I hope I can send some plants home. Here in these small towns there is a lot to do, almost more than in the cities. It's amazing how people often have such a knack for inventing. They improvise on any topic they want. And this can go on for hours. Tomorrow we're going to @(Pombal), about a two-hour drive from here, further inland - where, according to our plans, we'll stay for a few more days. Hugs and kisses.
_______________________
Since there is still time before departure, I want to write a few more lines. When I left @(São Paulo) I made the decision to write to several people. I don't have time for this and this situation will probably continue throughout the trip. I don't want my acquaintances to forget me. Therefore, I ask that, in addition to those I have forgotten, you speak to or call the following people on my behalf and tell them in this way that I send my greetings, because, for now, I am so overwhelmed with work that even with the best of will I cannot write: &(Mamma), &(Mischa) and family - &(Dima) and family - &(Paulo) and his family - &(Fructuoso) - &(Pereira) - &(Coral Popular) - &(Guarnieri) - &(Nené) - &(Dinorá) - &(Suzy) - &(Nympha) - &(Samuel) - &(Clorinda) - &(Autuori) - &(Franceschini) - &(Beinhauer) - &(Sophia Mello Oliveira) - &(Lenira) and everyone at &(Biblioteca Infantil) - &(Nicanor Miranda) - &(Maria Apparecida Duarte) &(Parques Infantilis) - &(Irene Bojano) &(Teatro Municipal) - &(Francisco Casabona) - &(Mário de Andrade). To all, my best wishes for Easter!!!! Also to you, my most tender wishes for Easter - lots of luck and blessings. &(Tamara) still remembers the poem she learned in kindergarten: dear and good Easter bunny...?? I will try to post these lines before I leave. For today, once again my most tender hugs, kisses and all the best, best wishes for Easter. Yours &(Martin)
_______________________
Dear &(Tamara)! Thank you very much for your message in the last letter. Stay good, brave and be obedient. Kisses.


Letter 31
MB: Letter No. 7
2 handwritten pages, black ink, lined paper, no letterhead
@(Pombal) (State: Paraíba) - Sunday - April 10th
Letter No. 7
I ask that you send me six pairs of my socks. I am not in need of them.
now, it can be arranged later 121.
Dear Tania,
Yesterday, I delivered letter no. 6 to a gentleman who was heading to @(João Pessoa) on the same day. This gentleman promised to forward the correspondence as soon as it arrived in @(João Pessoa). Otherwise, the letter would only leave @(Patos) for @(Campina Grande) today. Here, correspondence is not sent every day, and from @(Campina Grande) it is first sent to @(João Pessoa). Even though @(Pombal) is located only two hours by car from @(Patos), the connection by mail is much more complicated. Have you received my letter no. 6 yet? It may still be 10-15 days before we return to @(João Pessoa). I will have to wait so long without hearing from you, and right now, in these days. The &(Government of Paraíba), in an extraordinarily kind manner, is paying all our travel and lodging expenses during our stay in the state. So, without much expense - in fact, we are only paying the singers - we can visit most of the cities, stay three or four days in each one, and choose and record everything we can. With our own resources, such a long stay would be impossible. Today is Palmas Sunday. Yesterday, as well as today - it is about 10 am - an unusual heat prevails. I have never felt such intense heat in my life as these days. It almost gives me a headache. Even in the shade it is unusual. According to people, this excessive heat is a herald of rain. Thank God, I feel well and in good spirits. Here we sleep in hammocks placed in rooms in the city hall and eat in a nearby hotel. The people are extremely helpful and kind. Everything that can be useful to us is provided. The food is very good with a great variety. The only strange thing is that there is and even it is possible to see so little fruit. @(Pombal) is a very well situated city, not very large, where many people work seriously for progress. It is said that @(Pombal) is one of the oldest cities in the whole @(North) of @(Brazil). And it is so far inland... It is good that I have so much work to do, because that way I don't have much time to think about home. But, contrary to what I thought at first, it is very difficult for me to be away from you for so long. You are better there in @(São Paulo): &(Tamara) is with you and, today, April 10th, the birth should have been well overcome. You should be back home by now and naturally you have an unusual amount of work these days. What name will the child receive? Please let me know your idea about it. And what about the godmother? Have you chosen who should represent her? Where should the little child sleep? In &(Tamara)'s room? And will you let &(Tamara) continue to sleep there? Can &(Tamara)'s bed, the one given to her by &(Mrs. Brusse), still be used? Are you getting the little child used to sleeping through the night without feeding her? How is Tamara behaving? Is Mama happy? What does she say? Did Rina help? Is she still with you? I hope that the greatest worries have already passed! And you, how are you and how do you feel? Please write to me and tell me in detail how you are doing and what you have experienced these days! I am very sorry that I cannot be with you now. I hope that you have received all the help you needed from our relatives and acquaintances. I miss you! Please, as for the money, if possible, start paying back the $500 to Mario. But pay only the amount that you can afford. If possible, give $100 or $150 per month, so that in 3-4 months you will have paid everything. Ask for a receipt each time, so that there are no doubts. Mario is so overworked that he could never remember what was given to him. Only a written receipt can help. You can do it yourself, &(Mário) would just sign it. If it is as you said, that you can get by with $800 from my share, you could put a sum in the bank every month. Don't deposit it in &(City Bank), but in &(Caixa Econômica) or in &(Banco dos Funcionários Públicos), where the interest rates are significantly better, I think six percent or more! Just now I often think that we should try to buy a piece of land or a house on installments. If God keeps us healthy and allows us to continue earning, we could save a sum each month and later - the opportunity will always present itself - buy something of our own! Even if it is only a small amount at first, by depositing something each month we could add up a considerable amount in a few years! I know it is easier said than done, but please, let's think about it and try to make this plan a reality, if it is feasible! What's new in @(São Paulo)? Are there many concerts taking place? Which artists have been in @(São Paulo)? What do you know about the &(Conservatory)? How are the concerts of the &(Department of Culture) going? How did the &(Popular Choir) sing in its first concert this year and what did they sing? Please send me the program. What are your students doing and how is &(Waldemar) doing with his piano studies? Is he still in the mood to study? Do you have any new students? Have any of my students called? What else is new at home? To answer all my questions, you will have to write a very long letter!... I will send these lines tomorrow before we leave for @(Sousa), which is located even further inland in @(Paraíba), and where contact by mail will be even worse. I will await your reply to @(João Pessoa), where I will certainly arrive faster than a letter delivered inland. For today, my most tender hugs and kisses, hugs to you. Yours &(Brauni).
_______________________
Dear &(Tamara): Did you get my last lines? Are you being good and obedient? Do you already talk enough and ride your bike alone? Do you already know how to dress yourself? I kiss you. Your father.


Letter 32
MB: Letter No. 8
2 handwritten pages, black ink, unlined paper, no letterhead
Sousa (Paraíba) - Good Friday - [April 15th]
n° 8
Dear Tania,
A few days ago we were in Sousa, a small town in the interior of
Paraíba. Actually, we intended to stay here for only 1-2 days. However,
some unforeseen events happened and we will probably only continue to Cajazeiras tomorrow. The day before yesterday I was very angry. Imagine: in Patos, I asked
a gentleman I met there who would travel to João Pessoa to return the next day
next, to pick up our mail at the Parahyba-Hotel and
brought. Unfortunately, we could not wait for this gentleman to return because
we left early. The day before yesterday, a note arrived from him, which we went to
notices that he found and removed the correspondence of &(Saia) and &(Ladeira) in the hotel, but my correspondence and that of &(Pacheco) was returned, because they did not know us! This gentleman then went to the director of the post office and managed to find out that the letters, instead of being forwarded to @(São Paulo), were actually sent here, to @(Sousa). If everything goes well, I will receive the letters on Sunday. For me, there must be a large airmail. I asked several times at @(Parahyba-Hotel) for the correspondence to be kept until I return from the interior. As you can see, it is impossible to trust anything. I sent a telegram to the hotel asking them to keep my correspondence. When I return I will make a fuss in person. It will probably be at the end of the month. Yesterday we made a long and tiring trip, without achieving anything. They told us that far away, in the mountains, there still lived a group of blacks who sang old songs and practiced unique dances. Unfortunately, we didn't find any of that - no black people, no songs or dances. A two-hour drive and almost four hours on horseback - the same time on the way back. Very tired from the effort, I went to the hammock and slept a lot. Today I'm feeling better again. With work, there's not much to do today, since the population is very Catholic and doesn't work on holidays. How are you? Is everyone healthy? Did you receive my last letters? It's almost not worth sending letters from here. Only twice a week is the mail sent to the capital, and it takes a long time to get there. Only after that does it go to @(São Paulo)! In one of my last letters I asked you to send me some socks. Before you send them, embroider a letter on them as a mark of recognition. Today I had decided to write to you in detail, but I'm not in the mood: it seems that yesterday's eight-hour ride took all my thoughts away. We're especially lucky with the weather. Although we're traveling during the rainy season, winter as they say here, we haven't had any real rain yet. Normally during the rainy season, it is impossible to travel due to the floods. As if on request, it is stopping raining before we continue our journey and the road is well passable. It has been that way until now, and I hope it will be in the future as well. As I have already written, I am doing very well. I did not think I would get used to the climate here so easily. The heat during the day is almost unbearable, especially when there is no wind. In the late afternoon and at night it is pleasantly cool. Here we sleep in hammocks, which are very large and comfortable. When I get to @(Ceará) I will buy one or two hammocks, because they must be better and cheaper there. Here a simple hammock costs 40-50$000; the same can be bought in @(Norte), in the state of @(Ceará), for half the price. I have not yet found anything nice for &(Tamara). The land and the people here seem exhausted. Musically it is the same: the new hits from the city are especially worth it. The popular melody here, beautiful and truly rich in content, is worthless and is seen as being of lesser value. We have arrived at exactly the last moment. In a few years, if it continues like this, popular music will disappear. The care taken with it is already in sharp decline. Our task would have been crowned with greater success 15-20 years ago. The influence of radio and records is recognizable everywhere. Forgive my bad handwriting today: yesterday's cavalcade reached my fingers! &(Tamara) got a really big Easter egg? How did you spend Easter? Not much happens here. The population is very Catholic and very reserved these days. For today, my warmest hugs and kisses. All the best and beautiful. Yours &(Brauni).


Letter 33
MB: no numbering in the original (Letter no. 9)
2 handwritten pages, black ink, unlined paper, no letterhead
@(Curema) @(Paraíba) - [Wednesday] - April 20th
Dear &(Tania).
Yesterday we left @(Cajazeiras), one of the largest and most important cities in the interior of @(Paraíba), and arrived here in @(Curema). We found more music to record in all the small cities we passed through than there in @(Cajazeiras). The city is a little over a hundred years old and is growing rapidly, by local standards. It reminded me of @(Bragança), which is a little smaller. For us, there was nothing interesting there, and so we wasted two days. The people were very friendly and attentive, they promised us many singers and other groups, but in the end no one interesting came: the ones that did come were bad and useless. For the first time on this trip, I left a city unsatisfied, as a member of our expedition. On a personal level, I naturally liked the city more than the previous ones. I'm glad we're far from that region: I didn't feel very well especially in @(Pombal) and @(Sousa). I don't know if it was the intense heat, the food, the water or if it was all together. I didn't feel well. In @(Cajazeiras), the food and the hotel were better again. At night,
However, there were so many mosquitoes that it was almost impossible to sleep. Due to the heat, it was impossible to stay covered all the time. However, even when covered, these small insects find a way to the sleeping person and suck their blood. In this way, my sleep was disturbed. About an hour from @(Cajazeiras) we passed a large reservoir. The place is called @(Gonçalo). The government is building several dams spread throughout the @(North of the country) to combat the torturous drought. The dams accumulate water, and people from nearby towns extract the necessary water. Currently, light and energy are already being generated. In the future, probably more completely, the land will be irrigated by well-placed canals and thus become more fertile, since with enough rain the land is very rich. Last night we arrived here in @(Curema), a very small city. According to what they say, the largest dam in the entire @(North) is being built here, and that is why there is so much activity. Many workers, trucks, machines: a new city has sprung up. We have been given a house that is kept for occasional visitors from outside. There are more of these beautiful houses around here. You cannot imagine how happy I was to walk through this nice little house. After many, many weeks - yes, since @(São Paulo) - I find something habitable again: clean rooms with real wooden floors, with a ceiling, with clean walls in the rooms, clean beds or clean hammocks, running water - with a shower and electric light everywhere, day and night. In short, a real house: clean, as it should be. You cannot imagine how good someone can feel when it is possible to sit on a clean chair, when the table is not covered in flies and dirty, when there are real facilities for bathing, and so on. Just for this clean little house, I wish we could stay here a few more days. Not even in the best hotels in the capitals that we have stayed in have I felt as comfortable as here. Traveling in the countryside is very tiring, more than one can imagine. I still get angry today when I think that that idiot from @(Parahyba-Hotel) sent my letters back to @(São Paulo). I have already asked the hotel to keep my letters until I return, but it is possible that you will receive one or two letters back. Please do not worry about this. I am well and healthy. Keep writing to Parahyba-Hotel, because I believe that now the people there must be paying more attention and will keep my correspondence. I feel very anxious about not hearing from you, especially in these days. You have probably been the mother of a strong boy for some time now! It is likely that you are already out and about and that you are already healthy!! Today is April 20th - the birth cannot happen so late. This time too you made a mistake in the calculation, even more so than with &(Tamara). How can I explain this? What does the doctor say? A birth cannot be delayed by more than a month - is that possible? It is a known fact that a child comes into the world 1-3 months early and it happens frequently - but what about the opposite? Anyway, I am anxious about the first news. If conditions were better, I would telegraph home. This is an idea I will put into practice in the first major city where we stop for a few days. A telegram with a reply! I hope it works out!!! How are things going for you, &(Tamara) and all of you? Is everyone healthy? Please greet everyone for me. What's new? For today my warmest hugs, kisses, and all the best. Yours &(Brauni).


Letter 34 [cont. Letter 33]
MB: no numbering in the original
½ handwritten page, black ink, unlined paper, no letterhead
@(Sousa) [PB] - [Saturday] - April 23
Yesterday we traveled from @(Curema) to @(Sousa) and today we will continue to @(Campina Grande). Here I found the mysterious letter: it was from &(Bosch) from @(Recife) and contained the letter from &(Varatassi) and &(Höller). Yesterday I delivered a telegram to you with a paid reply to @(Campina Grande). Tomorrow I will be able to have the answer. For now, hugs and kisses!!!
Campina Grande
The boy picked up your telegram to deliver it to me at the hotel. We're continuing our journey now. I'll pick up the telegram tomorrow. Hugs and kisses. Brauni.


Letter 35
MB: Letter No. 11 [sic]
1 handwritten page, black ink, unlined paper, letterhead:
On the left: “Hotel Central - Avenida Manoel Borba, 209 - Teleg. End.
HOTOEN - Telep. 2051-2052-2053 - Recife - Pernambuco - Brazil; on the right:
“By Air”
@(Joao Pessoa), @(Parahyba-Hotel) [PB] - [Wednesday] - April 27th
No. 11 [sic]
Dear and good Tatiana.
Detailed letter #10 is on its way! Once again, I send you my warmest and most sincere wishes for happiness!!! We will probably be here for another fifteen days. So, you can keep writing here. In any case, the correspondence will be forwarded to me from here. How are you? Are you healthy? What is the little one doing - cheerful and lively? How is her diet? What is the little one's name? Due to this trip, the ten-day deadline for legal registration has long since passed, but I had already left it up to you to choose the little one's name. I forgot to tell you that, along with the little one's registration, you should immediately ask for a copy of &(Tamara's) baptismal certificate, which has been lost! What did you name her? &(Tatiana) or &(Mamma's) name - &(Elena)? Please let &(Dr. Nicanor) and &(Miss Oneyda) know that the notebooks they requested have arrived. Many thanks and hugs to both of you, as well as to Mrs. Nini and all our acquaintances. We returned from the countryside late on Monday night, very tired. I found your letters and telegrams here. Thank you very much. It was a real relief for me. Your last letter was number 4. Only here in the state of @(Paraíba) have I been able to record exactly 444 different melodies on discs to date. Please also tell &(Dona Oneyda) that in Recife we numbered the first disc as number 101, and that we have now reached number 178. We have enough material prepared, so that in about 2-3 months, if the trip continues like this, I will need new blank discs for recording. Everything is fine with me, I am healthy and I miss you and everyone very much. The letter has to go today, hence this haste and brevity! I will write more the next time. What is new in @(São Paulo)? What are your students doing? My regards to &(Fructuoso)! Is &(Guarnieri) still in @(São Paulo)? I hug and kiss you with all my heart. Kiss &(Tamara) and &(Pequena), the new member of the family, for me! Hugs and kisses from the heart to all the relatives! All the best, best wishes. Your old &(Brauni).


Letter 36
MB: Letter No. 12
1 handwritten page, black ink, unlined paper, no letterhead
@(Joao Pessoa) @(Parahyba-Hotel) [PB] - Thursday - April 28th
n° 12
Dear &(Tatiana)!
Today I received from &(Bosch) your letter No. 3 of April 9, with two razor blades. You wrote about the house: the way the owner's offer was made, we naturally cannot accept it or comply with it. Today the idea occurred to me: we should discuss the situation openly with Mr. &(Möser). Perhaps he could lend us money on favorable terms with the house as collateral. Every company makes a lot of money from the sale of a house. If the real value is 30 contos, the brokerage firm makes about 50 contos on the installments, and so on. In this way, one always has to work too hard for the company. On the other hand, if we had a sum of money in hand, we could buy a piece of land outright. Surely, if we do not rush, we will find something favorable. With luck, I think we can find a good piece of land for 10 contos. If we had the money, we could build a nice little house for about 30 thousand (up to 35 thousand) in cash. Then, instead of paying interest - we would have to pay for the amount borrowed - the house would be the collateral. It remains to be seen whether this would be possible, how much the interest would be, what the repayment period would be and whether it is possible at all. The interest rates charged by a bank would probably be so high that it would be difficult to pay, not to mention paying off part of the capital. Again, it would not be a good deal for us. In any case, if there is an opportunity, you could talk to Mr. &(Möser) about it. Often a bank owns houses or does business with houses - this could be a good opportunity for us. What do you think about this? Would you like to talk to &(Mr. Möser) about this? The pajamas you advertised have not arrived yet. Please do not send a second pair of pajamas, I can buy some here. I have also found some razor blades. There is no need to send them any more. Call &(Lucy Ivanco) and &(Clorinda). I thank them both for remembering me and I reciprocate with all my heart. Please tell &(Clorinda) not to stop working, to work hard, and to compose new songs! Also ask &(Dinorá) and &(Nympha) what they are working on. I am very interested in what they have done. My best wishes to them. I wrote to &(Mamma) about a week ago, from @(Sousa), but it is possible that this letter will arrive before, since @(Sousa) is far away in the #backlands. So, hug and kiss &(Mamma) for me and my deepest thanks for the congratulatory telegram. What happened with “Christmas for all” is not important. If you want, you can call “Estado de São Paulo” (Advertising Division) and ask for the address of “Christmas for all”. In the “Estado” there were always big announcements in the first weeks of this year about “Christmas for everyone” - but as I said, that is not urgent. As for the money for the dentist, wait a little longer. First, pay the 500$000 as you can and as you see fit. Then wait with the payment until an agreement is reached. I would like to arrange this personally with &(Mário). For now, deposit the money in a bank. In any case, wait with the payment until an order arrives! Did you write to &(Fritz) when he was passing through @(Santos)? What happened to the letter he wrote, what did he write? Has there been no more news from @(Salzburgo) - from his father, &(Marie) and &(Fanny)? Has &(Pepi) not written any more either? How are you managing now with your classes? You certainly have enough time, more than enough to work!... The little one, &(Tamara), the house, your work and teaching - how do you manage to keep up with all that? &(Tamara) is at least more independent now? Can she dress herself? How are you with the food - do you still have someone to help you?




Letter 37 [cont. letter 36]
MB: cont. Letter No. 12
1 handwritten page, black ink, unlined paper, no letterhead
[Joao Pessoa - PB] - Sunday - May 1st
Today I want to continue writing, because tomorrow we will travel to the interior again, visiting the cities that are still missing. This time we will stay closer to the capital and go to an area that is not in the arid region, where there is therefore plenty of water and rain. We will stay there for about 10-14 days, and then we will return to João Pessoa to record the songs that have already been prepared - which will take about 3-5 days. Only then, finally, will we go further to the @(North) - probably @(Rio Grande do Norte). Now I feel rested and ready again. The trip to the interior, to the #sertão, was somewhat tiring. Not so much because of work, but because of the lack of real hotels, and the trip by truck, which was also quite tiring. The hotel here is good, the best in the place. There are two of us in each room, me with &(Pacheco). The food is good and plentiful, the rooms are spacious and clean, the service is good, and there are good sanitary facilities, running water in the room, and electricity at all hours: all of which we have only learned to appreciate properly here in the countryside, where these are often lacking or deficient. We have been resting for the last few days: it was absolutely necessary. You can keep writing here, as we will be here for a few weeks. When we travel to the countryside I will leave most of my luggage here at the hotel, as there is very little that is necessary there. I cannot wear my gray suit because it is too hot. My blue suit and raincoat are safely stored with &(Bosch) in @(Recife) - they are useless for my work here. So I am forced to wear almost always my light white suit, which has served me well. When it needs washing, I wear the gray suit for a few days. In the countryside, I work and almost always go without my coat! The heat forces us to do this. My clothes are still in good condition - the scarves are enough. I will soon have to buy shirts and socks. The pajamas haven't arrived yet - maybe it would be good to complain? For today, my warm hugs and kisses, all the best and beautiful. Hug yourself, your &(Brauni). Kiss &(Tamara) and &(Pequena) for me! Please send again the address of &(Fabiano Lozano) and &(Mr. Glass). Sunday - before the trip: more hugs and kisses. I didn't meet &(Mr. Bosch) in person. He lives in @(Recife), but he sent me your letters, as I already informed.




Letter 38
MB: no numbering in the original (Letter no. 13)
2 handwritten pages, black ink, lined paper, no letterhead
@(Alagoa Nova) (Paraíba) - [Sunday] - May 8th


My dear Tania
We are once again in the interior of the state, this time not in the arid zone, but in @(Brejo), as the region where it rains enough is called here. Everything is very beautiful and full of hills. Sometimes there is still forest, and everywhere the land is well cultivated. Everything seems green and very fertile. After @(João Pessoa), we were first in @(Itabaiana), then in @(Alagoa Nova) - and today I continue writing from @(Areia), a small city located on an elevated site. Here too the weather conditions are better than in the #sertão, and even than those I found in João Pessoa. At night, it cools down a bit and even gets cold; the opposite is true in the #sertão (arid zone) and in João Pessoa, where it is often difficult to sleep because it is so hot. To this day, I cannot complain: I have always slept well - from tiredness, because traveling on the big truck is very tiring. Thank God, I am always healthy and fit. We will visit 5-6 more cities and towns before returning to @(João Pessoa). We will need about two weeks here in @(Brejo) to finish our schedule. Please keep writing to @(Parahyba-Hotel), because after our return we will stay there for at least a week. Time flies so fast... More than three months have passed since I left home. I always have work to do and the constant traveling distracts my thoughts. However, when I have a free hour, I have to stifle the feeling of absence that emerges when I think of you. I hope that the few months that are left until we return will also pass as quickly as they have been so far. How are you? Of course, you have already returned home from the clinic and I hope you are in full health. How are little &(Tamara), the house, the students? How are you doing with all this work? How are you managing it all? Is little girl healthy? Does she cry a lot or is she well behaved? Do you have a lot of work with her? And &(Tamara)? Are you going back to kindergarten in @(Vila Mariana)? How is she? What does &(Nenê) do? Is she still coming and is she healthy? Please send my regards! My regards to &(Mamma), &(Mischa), &(Dima) and family. I'm going to post this letter right here, because it takes a long time to get back to @(João Pessoa) and this way you won't go weeks without news. Did you receive my letters from #backlands? Did they take a long time to get there? The mail conditions still need to improve a lot here. Please call &(Oneyda): send our regards, tell her that we are all well and that only now have we learned to appreciate her care, the way she had the equipment packed. Without this careful packing, in strong crates, the equipment would probably have broken a long time ago from all these trips! We only have a little over a hundred blank discs to record, and with the good conditions we have here, the recordings are done much faster than in Pernambuco! For today, dear &(Tatiana), my tender hugs and kisses, all the best. Yours &(Brauni)
Please greet all acquaintances (&(Paulo), &(Fructuoso), &(Coral Popular), &(Mário))




Letter 39
MB: Letter No. 14
1 handwritten page, black ink, lined paper, no letterhead
@(Rio Tinto) [PB] - [Tuesday] - May 10th
My dear &(Tânia)
After a long journey, we arrived tonight here in Rio Tinto. From what I could see, it is a relatively large city, and from what they say, quite new. There are many factories. The company management gave us, as happened in @(Curema), a large house all to ourselves, with a bathroom and nice bedrooms, beds and good light: a very rare situation for the interior! Although I arrived very tired, I soon felt ready in this house, and so I am writing you a few lines. We will probably get back to @(João Pessoa) sooner than I thought. We found nothing useful in two cities. Tomorrow, we will go to the beach where there are Indians who still perform old dances. The place is called Baía da Traição. Afterwards, we will work here, in Mamanguape, perhaps in some other place, and then we will return to João Pessoa. Tomorrow our little daughter will be four weeks old. How fast the days go by... I am curious: what name will you choose for her? Are you happy with her? Does she already sleep all night without waking up? Now, she should be able to see well, and she probably laughs and shakes her feet and hands a lot. Does she cry a lot? How is her feeding going, is everything okay? What does &(Tamara) say about her little sister? Is &(Tamara) not jealous? For today, kisses. Yours &(Brauni)




Letter 40 [cont. letter 39]
MB: cont. Letter No. 14
3½ handwritten pages, black ink, lined paper, no letterhead
@(Rio Tinto) [PB] - [Thursday] - May 12th
Dear &(Tania)
Today, unexpectedly, I received your letters no. 1 and 2. The mayor here was in João Pessoa and we asked him to bring our mail. So, I received your letters when we returned from the meeting with the Indians. Instead of one day, we had two: yesterday and today. These letters made me immensely happy and I want to answer them today, as much as possible. I had already written to you that I received all your letters through &(Bosch). When the little girl cries and &(Tamara) starts crying too, can't you console &(Tamara) so that she doesn't cry anymore? When I have time, I will write to &(Nobre). For now, I send her my cordial greetings. Also, my many thanks and hugs to everyone who sent gifts or congratulations for the little girl. &(Tamara) must already know more verses besides the Easter bunny poem, right? And how many songs does she already know by heart? As for the name of the little girl, you first wrote that there were only ten days left for the registration, so I didn't express my opinion on the matter. Now you say that there are thirty days, and that time has already passed. You have probably already registered the little girl, and any name you have chosen is fine with me! &(Christina) or &(Oksäna) please me more than &(Martina). There are also beautiful Brazilian names (old indigenous names), and if you ask &(Mário), he will certainly suggest a number of these beautiful names for you to choose from. As for a godfather, I haven't thought about it yet. That, too, can be done later. In any case, it would be good if you started choosing now. You will certainly find someone suitable. If this &(Mr. Antônio) makes a bad impression on you, why do you still call him? Is it because you owe him some favor? Who could this man be who, under bad influence, wanted to delay the birth of the child? What does all this mean? I don't understand you. You have never had anything to do with spiritualism. Don't start with something like that now! I haven't received the socks, the other razors and the pajamas yet. Maybe I'll find them in @(João Pessoa) when I go back there in a few days. If possible, buy a good and safe baby carriage. I also think it's a good idea to go to &(Dr. Hübbe). A solution will soon be found. We don't need to be too anxious about the house. When a good opportunity comes along, we'll take it. You can, of course, try to find out more and do some research yourself. Maybe you'll find something acceptable. You shouldn't take &(Waldemar)'s case too seriously. He probably doesn't want to become a pianist, but just to be able to play some light pieces (dance music). Keep going even if he still plays the pieces with flaws. I think he'll keep going like this for a long time [...]. He can correct the flaws later. I think he feels better when he doesn't spend too much time studying the same piece [...]. You can tell him that here and there there are still flaws that need to be corrected, and that he will only be able to move forward in exceptional cases. Students are not all the same - try this once with &(Waldemar), like [...]. About your airmail: May God grant that your chest pain is cured and the pains have gone. How did this happen, what is the explanation, what does the doctor say? It would be a good idea if you told &(Mário) about your unexpected expenses and told him that you will start paying as soon as possible. Joining the social security fund is a good idea. However, ask &(Paulo). I believe that you can also get cheaper treatment with certain doctors through the city hall. As far as I know, the city hall employees have their own doctors and a hospital. Since I have never needed a doctor, I have never worried about it either. But I have always heard about it. Lately, I have been recording all the melodies on records. First, because it is much more accurate and correct, and second, because it is faster. So far, in the state of Paraíba alone, we have recorded over seven hundred melodies on discs. Here, I have composed very little. In Pernambuco, a lot. Naturally, I have listened to many more. When we arrive in a city, we first seek out the mayor and, with his help, we look for people to consider. These people are first interviewed, what we want is chosen and then recorded on discs. We usually have to wait a day or more before we can start recording. This happens mainly if a singer lives far away or when the people we need are not available at the time of recording. It has also happened that we have not found anything usable in a city. This has meant wasting 1 or 2 days. Please call Frohsinn again: send my best regards and my many thanks for the wishes of all the singers. I did not give my address, as I do not have a fixed place to stay, as you know. I would be very interested to know if Frohsinn has already prepared its night of songs for this year, where it will be held and what the program will be like. I would like to know if &(Frohsinn) has participated in other parties and celebrations, where and how it was. And also how the singers' participation is going and what is being prepared for the future!
I have managed well so far with my personal expenses. I have to have a linen suit made, since I can't keep just one, and because of the heat I can't wear the gray suit. I also have to have high-top shoes with leather leggings made, because in the countryside, with flat shoes and long pants, you get dirty in no time. Also, traveling on dusty roads leaves a light-colored suit filthy in a day. To be more in keeping with my situation, I want to have high-top shoes, leather leggings and a pair of short, strong, dark pants made in @(João Pessoa) right now. I don't need to borrow the money for this, since I have enough money to spend on it, because I can afford it within my monthly budget of $100. Please don't worry. If anything unexpected happens, I will write to you in time. As for &(Tamara) and the kindergarten, you should contact &(Lozano). Tell him that, since I am not here, I will try to find out from him what we have to do to get &(Tamara) into the kindergarten at @(Praça Patriarca) - or whatever he thinks is best for &(Tamara). I would like her to go to a Brazilian school. &(Lozano) knows all the conditions of the schools and can help, since he works in the principal's office. It is probably better than waiting only for &(Lenira). I ask you again to ask &(Lenira) about the repertoire that the choir at &(Biblioteca Infantil) is singing, and also if &(Lenira) knows if the children at &(Parques Infantilis) are making progress in singing. (Did you receive that letter in which I wrote that &(Fructuoso) has the scores that &(Flávio) asked about?) Did you receive my letter no. 13, from @(Areia)? Please, give my best regards to all relatives and acquaintances. Kiss little &(Tamara) for me. Tell &(Tamara) that I am not hiding in the basement, that she can rest easy, because I am traveling and will be back soon, that I always think of her and love her very much. With my most tender hugs and kisses. Your old &(Brauni).


Letter 41
MB: Letter No. 15
6 handwritten pages, black ink
1st page: lined paper, letterhead [“ @(Parahyba-Hotel) /@( Vidal de Negreiros Square) / @(João Pessoa) ”]
2nd page: unlined paper, letterhead [On the left: “Hotel Central - Avenida Manoel Borba, 209 - Teleg. End. HOTOEN - Telep. 2051-2052-2053 - Recife - Pernambuco - Brazil; on the right: “Via Aérea”]
3rd sheet: unlined paper, without letterhead


@(Joao Pessoa) [PB] - [Saturday] - May 14th
Letter No. 15
My Dear &(Tânia)!
Today I received the six pairs of socks and the box with the eight remaining razor blades, all in good condition! Thank you very much. The pajamas have not arrived until today. Please file a complaint with the post office! I hope you have kept the receipt. I sent you a letter, number 14, which you have probably already received. Thank God, I am well and feel well. I am seriously concerned about your chest pain - I hope everything is fine again!!! I ask you to translate and forward to &(Mário) the following: Today, &(Saia) showed me the letter that &(José Bento) wrote on behalf of Mr. &(Mário) to him. I did not consider the incident in Curema because it occurred in a situation of high spirits on our part, and from then on until today, we have been working on good terms 164. In my opinion, it was not necessary to bother &(Mário) with this, and thinking like that, I did not write anything to him. However, after &(Saia) wrote to &(Mário) about this incident in @(Curema), and I was able to read the response written by @(José Bento) on behalf of @(Mário), I also want to tell my version of what happened. That day there was a lot to do, all in the intense heat. I was listening to the singers and their songs, choosing what was good and useful, taking notes and asking people what was necessary, preparing everything for the recording. I am usually helped by &(Saia) with the questions to the singers and I like that, because I believe that two people do better research than one. At first, when it was time to record, everything went well. It was in the afternoon. We recorded coconuts and toadas from the reisado. I had the microphone next to the singers, and &(Ladeira), who always writes down the melodies recorded with me to be very precise, was next to me. On a chair, my notebook with the names of the songs already written down and prepared for recording. Everyone in a closed room. Whenever possible, we record indoors, because the recording becomes cleaner. In another room, &(Pacheco) is with the equipment. I prepare the singers and signal &(Pacheco) to start recording. When &(Pacheco) puts the needle on the record, he signals me back and I tell the singer that he can start singing. At the end of the song, I signal &(Pacheco) again and he stops recording. Thus, we spend half an hour or an hour of concentrated and attentive work. It was then that, during the recording, &(Saia) comes in and talks to me and the singers. He is visibly restless. He also goes to &(Pacheco) and wants to have the recorded songs played to him. Before each recording, we do a test to find out which position of the singer in relation to the microphone works best. Only then do we actually start recording. The first recording, or rather, the first song of a singer is, whenever possible, played back to eventually further improve the singer's position in relation to the microphone. After that, everything continues without interruption, since the relationship between the voice and the device has already been tested. In addition, &(Pacheco) constantly listens [with headphones] next to the device and immediately warns if something is not in order. I follow this procedure exactly, and if I am in doubt about a passage that may not be good, I have the passage played back and, if necessary, I have it recorded again. Naturally, in a highly responsible job like this, it is necessary to be able to work calmly and without distractions, for myself and for the singers. A person who goes back and forth and says something unnecessary naturally gets in the way. &(Saia) has some recently recorded songs played for some people present, which delays and distracts, and could perfectly well be done after the recordings. But everything still goes smoothly. &(Saia) orders an interruption, explains the devices to the people and, while he poses as the head of the Mission in front of the people, disrupts the continuity of the work. On this day, we could very well have recorded all the songs and continued the journey. Staying an extra night is like losing a day's work for us, and our time here is valuable. Little by little, I'm starting to get impatient. &(Saia) thinks that this or that could be improved, that this or that is lacking. I don't see anything exceptional: the singer continues with the same intonation, I have the microphone in the same position as before, and &(Pacheco) doesn't say that there is any problem with him. Then the incident occurs. During the recording of one of the last songs, a factory siren can be heard in the distance. The melodies were short and I asked the singer to repeat each one of them so that I could record them better. During the repetition of this song - that is, the melody was already very clear the first time - the factory siren can be heard on the record, for 2-3 bars, in the background. However, one can follow both the verses and the melody of the song clearly, without any difficulty. And this can be verified at any time, since this record is still available. I have recordings - of the bumba-meu-boi, for example - in which, due to the noise of the bystanders, the melodies can barely be heard. Other recordings also have one or another noise due to the environment. How many times has it happened, despite having told the singer when he should sing and everything going smoothly during the rehearsal, and then, during the recording, with the device already recording, I give the signal to start singing and the caboclo has the idea of asking - is it now? I nod my head and make an affirmative signal with my hand, and instead of singing, the caboclo asks again out loud: is it really now? - What should I sing? Then, suddenly, he remembers the agreement and starts to sing. One or another coughs or spits loudly. What can be done? We prepare everything consciously, but some unforeseen events are inevitable. In any case, the recording with the factory siren in the background, during the repetition of the song, is worth its weight in gold compared to other incidents. &(Saia) is nervous and makes an expression as if I, and not the factory siren, were the culprit. In front of everyone present he shouts: repeat this song, record it again! I ask to play it and I think it is unnecessary to record the song again, since it is clear once and on repeat it is good, really very clear. &(Saia) is furious and even I lose my patience and respond as I please. He says that he is the boss and that it is up to him to give the orders and interrupt or repeat the recordings, etc., that it should be as he wants. I say that I have never questioned his status as head of &(Mission), that I have never contradicted a word of his decisions, but that in this case I think it is unnecessary to record the song again. First, because the recording is good, very good, and second, because of the time wasted and the wasted record. Everyone defends their position. Later, everything calms down and the work continues. I end up giving in and the song is recorded again. Each of us talks about writing to &(Mário). The trip continues to go well, as does our work together. I had the impression that the incident had been forgotten, and when I later learned of the change in @(São Paulo), I naturally did not write to &(Mário) about it, since at that moment he had other concerns. When I then read &(José Bento's response, in which it is stated several times that the director is only &(Saia), well, it seemed to me that until today I had naturally submitted to all the determinations, which &(Saia) must also admit. So, to avoid any misunderstandings, I decided to write these lines to &(Mário). Just after the incident in @(Curema), &(Saia) is much friendlier. He is more concerned with his obligations than with mine. I think that recording the songs is my occupation in agreement with &(Pacheco), the equipment technician, with whom I have always understood and worked well until today. When choosing the songs, all of &(Saia)'s advice is naturally taken into account, especially regarding the lyrics, which I could never do on my own, without his help. What &(Saia) used to do frequently - giving the signal for the beginning and end of the recording - he leaves completely up to me. In cocos, for example, it is common for the singer to sing the same melody for half an hour straight. In other popular songs, the melody is also often repeated several times. We cannot record everything, and I usually stop recording after 2-4 verses, depending on the type of song. &(Saia) likes to listen to music, but he lacks any spark of musicality. He often gave the signal to stop recording in the middle of the melody. What can I do? Up until @(Curema), everything was going well. &(Saia) could be very helpful in the recordings. Instead of getting in the way and delaying the work, he could record the lyrics as much as possible or do other studies. But now, after @(Curema), &(Saia) gives me enough freedom and I feel more at ease. It is the first time, since I have known &(Mário), that I have had to talk to him about someone else. I don't like it, and I hope it will also be the last time. In my opinion, it would be better if &(Mário) did not bring up this subject again, because everything is in order here, and as I said, I now have more freedom than ever and I am in a good mood. I ask &(Mário) to let me know if he received a choral piece of mine (a composition), which I sent him months ago. It is also worth emphasizing how the Government here dedicates itself to us: in addition to the expenses for trips to the interior - the truck costs 150$000 per day, which is paid by the Government - the hotel expenses here in @(João Pessoa) are also paid. This way, we have almost no expenses. In my opinion, it would be good if, before we leave Paraíba, all the pieces collected so far (images, etc.) were sent to São Paulo, because you never know what might come tomorrow. These objects will be safer stored in @(São Paulo) than here. The recorded discs should be seen in another way. The singer and his natural music remain here. The State does not lose anything, it only gains in publicity. It is a shame that everything took so long to happen, but at the same time it gives us a little insight into our life.
_______________________
Dear &(Tânia): Maybe you could call &(Mário) and ask if you can talk to him. Maybe that would be better than translating and writing all this, right? But report everything exactly as it is here! Don't tell anyone about the contents of this letter! Warm hugs and kisses. Yours &(Brauni). My best wishes and hugs to &(Mário).




Letter 42
MB: Letter No. 17
2 handwritten pages, black ink, unlined paper, no letterhead
@(Joao Pessoa) [PB] - [Sunday] - May 22nd
No. 17
My dear &(Tânia).
Please call &(Nicanor Miranda) again. Greet him on my behalf and tell him that I ask him to send detailed advertisements and informative material to the address below, as I believe that they want to copy the &(Children's Parks) here: &(Prof. Matheus de Oliveira).&(Department of Education). &(Palácio das Secretarias). @(João Pessoa). @(Paraíba). Ask him to send anything that is interesting about the &(Children's Parks). I read in a newspaper here the new rules for naturalizations. According to these rules, a certificate must be sent stating the first place of stay, the period from _____ to _____
(approximately) that we live there and that we have fulfilled all obligations. Naturally, you will speak to &(Salles) about it and ask if this declaration is necessary in my case. It would not be difficult to obtain it from &(Dima) in @(Bragança). In any case, I think it would be good to have such a declaration, authenticated by the local police. What do you say about this? I hope that my naturalization will be approved this year. That is what I wish with all my heart. &(Suzi) and &(Dinorá) promised to talk to friends about my case. Did neither of them call you? When I return to @(São Paulo), if my naturalization has not yet been approved, I will dedicate myself exclusively to this important matter, as long as necessary.


Letter 43 [cont. 42]
MB: cont. Letter No. 17
1½ handwritten pages, black ink, unlined paper, no letterhead
[João Pessoa - PB] - Monday - 23 [of May]
We are still here in @(João Pessoa) and we have just received a telegram from &(Mário) in which he requests the immediate continuation of the voyage 174. However, it seems to me that we will no longer reach the ship scheduled for the 26th of this month, as nothing is prepared and it will probably still take a whole week until we finally leave here. This is not my business either, I have nothing to decide. Yesterday, we recorded part of the catarineta ship, which they say is represented here every year by 20-30 men 175. A beautiful sailing boat - in fact a copy of the old sailing ships - relatively large in the middle of the street, in front of it, the sailors and all the ship's officers. Unfortunately this year they do not yet have real uniforms. They ran out of money, they say, but even so, they make a good impression. The representation - a toy, as they call it - lasts for hours and is almost always sung with little prose. The singing style, monodic, is almost always the same: a soloist (or two) begins the song, all the others together - the choir - respond or repeat the same verse and melody. It takes a long time because each song has many verses, and those already sung are often repeated. The singing is constantly accompanied by dancing, and in this way there is always movement in the scene. In my opinion, the musical part has been harmed, because the accompanying orchestra (guitar, banjos and cavaquinhos), added in recent years, has changed the rhythm of the melody and introduced dance rhythms, which certainly differ from the original, and correspond to recent times. As far as I know, &(Mário) recorded the nau catarineta here. Only one song, from what I could gather, has remained in the old form! All the other songs have already undergone modifications, and some very pronounced ones. Music among the people simply lives and changes constantly. The days here are all beautiful. During the afternoon, it is hot; at night, it is usually too hot. About the rain, they told us that during your season it rains for days and even weeks at a time. Thank God we didn't get any rain. It rarely rains lightly around here. In the interior, we were surprised by heavy rain a few times. Apparently we were spared, because it rained a lot here this year. Kisses. Yours &(Brauni). The pajamas haven't arrived yet!


Letter 44 [cont. 42]
MB: cont. Letter No. 17
1½ handwritten pages, black ink, unlined paper, no letterhead
[João Pessoa - PB] - Wednesday - 25th [of May]
Dear Tania!
Thank you very much for your letter of the 20th of this month. I want to answer it now as soon as possible. In the meantime, you must have heard from me. The mail is simply too slow, especially in the interior, where in some places letters are sent only twice a week. Your suffering distresses me, even more so because I am so far away and cannot help. I have already said once in @(São Paulo) that I do not think it is advisable for you to accept the position at Viennensis. If you consider the material side as the main one, you must also take into account that you cannot have two activities at the same time. If you play in the afternoon and in the evening, you will not be able to teach: the work at the Café is very exhausting and tiring in the long run. You will also have many more expenses. You will need more dresses, clothes and shoes, which wear out more quickly; you will have to arrange and pay for a reliable person to stay at home at night. In the end, I believe that the total income, after deducting all these associated expenses, would make no greater difference than what you earn now with your students. The Café does not offer any greater security; on the contrary. I am convinced that in a short time you would be deeply unhappy, which would not be compensated in any way by a few extra mil-réis. On the outside, the work seems as if all you had to do was go there, sit down, spend the whole time playing, collect the money once a week, and nothing more. But this type of work brings many small inconveniences, which irritate and attack more precisely because they are so small and insignificant. And as the months go by, a job like this becomes so exhausting that you are barely able to undertake anything else. The pay is also not that great. I would think it would be better if you tried to make new relationships and seek new friendships more than you have been doing up until now. I believe that this way you could get more students. You could pay a visit every Sunday, or perhaps once during the week. You are also out of touch with your professional colleagues. It is difficult for me to write you advice, since you are more involved in life than I am. I also lack the peace of mind to do so: when I return to the hotel there is a lot of noise and movement. I believe that you are going through a spiritual turmoil, perhaps without realizing it, and that it is this that is causing these worries. I know that your income should be better and more comfortable, but remember that it is part of us to always desire and seek what we do not have. Think about it: how many people seek exactly what they have? Consider the case of poor &(Mischa), how he has to get by and how his family has to live. If I have the opportunity and the peace of mind these days, I will delve deeper into your letter. In any case, I must say that you are wrong if
You think my letters have been more indifferent lately because instead of the desired boy a girl came. Heads up!!! For today my most tender hugs and kisses, and all the best. Your old &(Brauni).
_______________________
Dear &(Tamara)! I appreciate your letter and wish you all the best. Kisses
Renata for me as I kiss you.


Letter 45
MB: There is no numbering in the original [Letter No. 18]
1 handwritten page, black ink, unlined paper, letterhead:
On the left: “@(Hotel Central) - @(Avenida Manoel Borba), 209 - Teleg. End.
HOTOEN - Telep. 2051-2052-2053 - @(Recife) - @(Pernambuco) - @(Brazil); on the right:
“By Air”
@(Joao Pessoa) @(Parahyba-Hotel) [PB] - [Thursday] - May 26th
My dear &(Tânia).
I have just received your second airmail. I must be brief so that these lines can be sent today, because the airmail will be sent to @(South) in half an hour. I do not look favorably on you accepting this job. In fact, I am convinced that it would only harm us. Speak to &(Paulo), openly and frankly. Speak also to &(Fructuoso). You will see that everyone agrees with my point of view and will advise you against the job. Ask &(Paulo) and &(Fructuoso) to consider this conversation confidential and strictly personal. I will write to you soon in more detail. In the middle of next week, we will travel, apparently, to @(Pará). However, you can still write here, because the correspondence will be forwarded to me. Kiss &(Tamara) and &(Renata) for me. To all relatives, acquaintances and friends, many hugs from my heart. My most tender hugs and kisses, and best wishes for happiness. Hug yourself, your &(Brauni).


Letter 46
MB: Letter No. 19
2½ handwritten pages, black ink, unlined paper, no letterhead
@(João Pessoa) [PB] - [Friday] - May 27th
n° 19
My dear, good &(Tânia).
You have now received my previous letters, and today I will try to return to the subject of your last two airmails. I feel very responsible for the course of your thoughts. To get to the heart of this matter, I must go back to the days before I left @(São Paulo). You have sometimes said to me, in a joking tone, that without me being at home you would be able to save much more, because I spend a lot of money, and that in my absence the money would stay at home. Your words came to my mind later, and then I wrote to you, without thinking of the consequences, in several letters in a row, about buying a house, about paying off debts, and about saving money in the bank. Naturally, I did not think that you should earn more money. I imagine that my attitude towards financial matters may be the unconscious cause of your worries. Of course it would be good and almost necessary to earn more money. But one should not choose the first path to this. In general, a musician in a café in this country is considered no more than a waiter; and a woman, in general, even less. It is simply the way it is. Even if the income is really greater and safe, everything else is given up. If I, for example, had to play the violin in a café today in @(São Paulo), it would be extremely difficult to leave it later and get a better job. The world is simply like that. If you play in a café, more than half of your salary is spent on work-related expenses, and it will be almost impossible to get new students. In addition, old students - the current ones - would certainly be lost. And what is most important: I am convinced that this would harm me and us. As for the debts, I have already written to you that you should not see everything in such a tragic way. I am sure that &(Mário) will wait for the money back if you explain the situation to him. Should I write to him? When I return to @(São Paulo) I will also earn more, and soon we will be better off. In the last two months you have had extra expenses with &(Renata). As you wrote, &(Rina) lived with us for a few weeks, and other people also came more than usual. You must have had expenses with the doctor, the pharmacy, cars, etc. So, this adds up to a large sum without you really realizing it. I believe that today these extra expenses are over, and in a few months the difference will be settled. Whether we will ever put money in the bank, only God knows. There has always been good will, but nothing has come of it. When I am in São Paulo, perhaps we can commit ourselves - and more importantly, fulfill it - to making a monthly deposit of at least $20-25 in a bank. You will laugh, this is nothing, you will say. We could always have this amount available monthly. It is better than nothing, and if possible, we could increase the amount. At least it would be a start and over time we would accumulate a small amount of wealth. From what I can see, I will be back in about three months. If we stayed in each state for at least two months, as has been the case up until now, we would have to be away for more than a year and the money would not be enough for that. Since &(Mário) is no longer the Director [of the Department of Culture], it will be very difficult to obtain more funding than that initially planned. We have not yet been to @(Rio Grande do Norte), @(Ceará), @(Piauí), @(Maranhão), @(Pará). These are the five northernmost states that should be visited. It is unlikely that we will get that far. In addition to these, there are still some states further south, such as @(Bahia) and @(Alagoas), which we would also like to visit. However, this plan is out of the question. Now, our boss &(Saia) has determined that we travel next Monday to @(São Luís), the capital of @(Maranhão). Furthermore, he no longer wants to travel by ship, by sea, as planned, but by land with the truck. It is a distance of almost one thousand and five hundred kilometers, and no one here can say for sure whether there are passable roads to get there. I hope the trip goes well and that we don't get stuck anywhere. If nothing goes wrong, the trip will last three days. Please don't write here anymore. When we reach our new destination, I will immediately inform you of the new address. It is possible that the travel plan will be changed at the last minute. If we travel as planned, we will have to cross the entire length of the State of Paraíba, the width of the States of Ceará and Piauí, and then arrive approximately in the middle of the State of Maranhão, where we still have a considerable distance to go to the capital São Luís. We will travel to Pará and Belém later, after Maranhão, and not now, as I wrote to you in my last letter. I have already arranged for any letters that arrive for me after my departure to be forwarded to me. I want to tell you that my pajamas have not arrived yet. I have already received everything else. Lots of kisses for today, your Brauni.




Letter 47 [cont. 46]
MB: cont. Letter No. 19
½ handwritten page, black ink, unlined paper, no letterhead
[Joao Pessoa - PB] - Saturday - May 28th
My dear &(Tamara)
Today I am thinking a lot about you, so I want to write you a few lines. From what Mom said, you still think about me and even believe that I am hidden somewhere at home. I am very far away from you. But if you are well behaved, if you obey Mom when, for example, she calls you just once and you come right away, then I won't be away for much longer. I hope that you work hard at school and that at home you help Mom, that you eat by yourself and learn to dress by yourself. Kiss your little sister &(Renata), Mom and Grandma with all your heart for me. Hug &(Nenê) for me. I wish you all the best and the best. Once again: be well behaved, obedient and hard working. I kiss you from the bottom of my heart, your daddy.




Letter 48 [cont. 46]
MB: cont. Letter No. 19
½ handwritten page, black ink, unlined paper, no letterhead
[Joao Pessoa - PB] - Sunday - 29th [of May]
It seems that tomorrow the trip will continue. However, until we actually leave I don't believe it anymore. There is always a delay or change at the last minute. If we travel as planned, we will spend the night tomorrow in Itabaiana, a two-hour drive from here. On Tuesday, we will go to @(Cajazeiras), at the end of the state. On Wednesday, we will go to somewhere in @(Ceará) or @(Piauí) - that is, if there are roads, if the rain hasn't destroyed them - and on Thursday we should arrive at @(Teresina), on the border of @(Piauí) and @(Maranhão). From there there is a train connection to @(São Luís), the capital of @(Maranhão), the provisional objective of our trip. If a train leaves from Teresina on Friday, we will arrive at @(São Luís) in the evening. A long and tiring journey, but don't worry, it's not dangerous. The worst that can happen is that we'll be stuck somewhere for a few days. If there's no news for a week or more, don't worry. I'm fine. Thank God, I feel healthy. Only in the last few days have I had a slight toothache. I miss you and &(Tamara) very much, and I would really like to meet &(Renata). In a few months I'll be with you, my dear. Kisses, your &(Brauni).




Letter 49 [cont. 46]
MB: cont. Letter No. 19
½ handwritten page, black ink, unlined paper, no letterhead
[Joao Pessoa - PB] - Monday - May 30th
I quickly write a few more lines. We will be leaving here in a few hours and I still have to pack my suitcase. Once again: don't worry if you don't hear from me for a week, because sending mail from the interior takes a long time. Complain about your pajamas - they haven't arrived yet! Warm hugs and kisses to you, all the best. Yours &(Brauni).




Letter 50
MB: There is no numbering in the original
4 handwritten pages, black ink, lined and unlined paper, no letterhead
@(Jaicós) @(State of Piauí) - [Wednesday] - June 8th
My dear &(Tânia).
This is the second day that we have been here in this small town. We arrived the night before last, and yesterday morning, early in the morning, we had barely left the city, when a part of the car broke: we could not continue. Luckily, it happened close to the city, but even so, it was not possible to repair the damage. We lacked all the means to do so. We fixed it as well as possible and thus hope to arrive today at a larger city closer by, where it will be easier to find a way to continue. This trip has been full of obstacles from the beginning. Instead of leaving on the morning of May 30th, we did not leave in the afternoon, but only at 11 pm. Since everyone was hungry, we still went to eat something and it was exactly midnight when we left @(João Pessoa): the trip had finally begun. We arrived in @(Itabaiana) after 2 am, and spent the night at our driver's house. Still having slept badly, we continued our trip on the same day, the 31st, to @(Campina Grande), where we bought merchandise to be resold at a good profit in the distant interior. This business is done by our driver, but it is also good for us, because it saves us money. The whole day was spent buying and loading the merchandise - it was kerosene and gasoline - and only after dinner did we leave the city. @(Campina Grande) is the largest city in @(Paraíba) after @(João Pessoa). Electric light exists only in appearance, it is a memory of light. What a stranger said applies in this case: when asked if he had seen electric lighting, he replied that he could not say anything, because he had passed through the city at night. It really is a joke! I have never in my life seen such a dim light. It is useless, it is impossible to read or work with it. It has been like this for years, and it will probably remain that way for a long time. We did not get far on our trip. Soon after we left the city, a part of the car's steering broke. Thank God nothing bad happened. The car shook a lot, but luckily this stretch of road was wide and it was possible to control it. The damage could not be repaired right away, and we returned with another truck to @(Campina Grande), where we spent the night and only on June 1st, the next day, did we go to our car. The damage had already been repaired and we continued on from there. Our truck is a large and heavy vehicle. I usually travel on top, in the back, sitting on boxes, where I find a place as comfortable as possible. Traveling on top is more pleasant than traveling in the front: you have more freedom of movement, you can stand up, turn around and lie down as you please. But you always have to be careful, because once the car tilts to one side, soon after a tree comes along with its branches hanging down, which you have to dodge quickly and skillfully. However, it makes up for it with the view that you have from there in all directions, a view that is especially attractive. We continued through a region that we already knew. Slowly, we approached the mountains that I have already described to you once, the @(Serra da Viração). Then, another breakdown occurred in the car. It took us more than an hour to fix the damage. It was late winter, the rainy season: in every possible place to cultivate this dry land, you see fields of ripe corn, cassava, beans and, more rarely, sugar cane. A barren land due to the lack of water. The heat was scorching. We did not stop in @(Patos), because we had to make up for lost time. We had dinner in @(Pombal), and when we continued, it was already dark. When we arrived at @(Rio Piranhas), where the first time we had stopped for a long time because our truck was too wide and did not fit properly on the narrow boat that kept traffic on the river, the fast current had turned into a shallow pool of stagnant water. It had not rained for a long time. Without many stops, we arrived at @(Cajazeiras) on June 2nd, and from there on we continued through new and unknown domains for me. We were on the border between @(Paraíba) and @(Ceará). The first town in the latter state is called @(Alagoinha), which, in common with several of these cities - as these villages are called here - has a large square in front of the church in the center, some houses around it, and, if all goes well, even one or two streets. (New paint has just arrived) 187. The next town, a little bigger, is called @(Lavras). From there we continued to @(Juazeiro) and (Crato) - or rather, we should have followed them. After @(Lavras) there was a crossroads and we took the wrong road. The path got worse and worse: on all sides, no houses and no people. In the first village they told us that we had taken the wrong road. I had never heard so many contradictory opinions as here. Most people told us that a path, not exactly good but passable, led to @(Crato), and some people thought it would be better to turn back and take the right road. We thought that the road could not get much worse than it had been up to this point, and since we had already covered part of it, we wanted to continue on the same path, which we did. The road was barely passable, and progress was very slow. When it got dark and the obstacles got bigger, we called it a day, and with difficulty I reached a hammock in a farmer's house. The wind blew all night, and I had nothing to cover myself with. I was cold. Just as it is hot during the day, it gets cold at night here. Very tired, without dinner, I fell asleep right away, and the next day - June 3rd - early in the morning, we continued on. By this time we could have been close to our destination if everything had gone well. The road conditions got even worse. We often had to stop to remove large rocks from the path or fill in very large holes. Once, the truck got stuck in a stream and slowly began to sink into the mud. We quickly unloaded everything and gathered all our strength to pull the car out of the water. We had realized that we would not reach @(Crato) that day. The only slightly larger town on this route is called @(Várzea Alegre). In some places we had to build new paths. I think we would have gone faster on foot. Once again I found a hammock in a peasant's house and a place on a pile of freshly harvested rice. I was very tired and slept very well. The next morning, very early, the trip began again, full of obstacles. It was already June 4th. Sometimes the path still needed to be improved. We were happy when we traveled a kilometer without any major obstacles. We were happy and hoped that the road would improve. But it remained the same. There were stretches that we do not know where or how we got through. The region is very undulating, always going up and down. It was a real miracle that nothing in the car had broken down in these impossible places. At the end of the afternoon we finally reached Ipueira, from where a good road to Crato should have started. We ate well again, and we also found cigarettes. The general morale was lifted and the road was indeed a little better. Here too the same conflicting opinions: one man said that it would take forty minutes to get from @(Ipueira) to @(Crato), another that it would take five hours. In the evening, another accident. On a steep climb over a hill, the car came very close to the edge of a cliff. I was just jumping out when, suddenly, the car stopped on an inclined position. The car was carefully unloaded, removed from its dangerous situation and loaded again. We were lucky, nothing happened, we just lost a lot of time. The road got worse again, but we slowly passed without having to improve it. A light rain fell and Crato was nowhere to be seen. Finally, well after midnight, we arrived there. Everything was dark and closed. We found a place in a hotel. We had finally arrived in Crato, where good roads start. After many hot and dusty days I was able to take a shower again and sleep in a clean room. On Sunday, June 5th, around noon, we left Crato for Piauí. We went up the Serra do Araripe, where we walked for hours on a road as straight as an arrow. If the road had been good, we could have reached a good speed, but even so we came very quickly. Crato is a blessed city where there is never a shortage of water, which here in the arid zone seems like a miracle. Everything is really green, tall trees, coconuts and other palm trees, all very pleasant. Also at the beginning of our journey, for more than an hour, the land is irrigated, partly tall forests with some orchids, then slowly the trees become smaller, until we again travel through the low bushes so common here. The region is absolutely flat for miles. In some places the leaves are already falling yellow, and in others the bushes are bare and bare. Summer has begun. They say that here the cattle have to go 6-7 months without water during this period. In the evening we arrived at Campos Sales, the last city on our route through Ceará, and we spent the night there. For the first time on our trip they asked us for documents. The next day, June 6th, my birthday, we continued early. We left Ceará and entered Piauí State through Lagoa Seca. Here too it is an arid area on all sides, much of it very sandy terrain and a hot climate. We passed through Socorro and Boa Esperança and, in the evening, we arrived at Jaicós, where we are still. We spent the night, and the next morning, June 7th, very close to here, shortly after our departure, another accident occurred: the car's radiator broke, and we lack any means of help or repair. Yesterday and today, the part was repaired. If all goes well, we will continue our journey tomorrow. Another stop of two full days. Now we will only arrive on the 13th or 14th in São Luís, our final destination. There is no post office here: correspondence is delivered to travelers. I will take these lines with me to the first larger city we come to. I would also like to reply to the letter I received before our departure from @(João Pessoa). It was written on May 17th, and contains the dear photographs and a letter from &(Mamma) and &(Dima). Thank you very much. The photographs made me very happy, as did your story about &(Renata): it is good to know that she is healthy and developing well. Please greet the &(Brichta family) for me. I am glad to know that &(Tamara) misses me. I miss her too, and you too, and I want to meet little &(Renata). I think that in three months at the latest we will arrive in @(São Paulo). Our money is running out and we cannot count on a new shipment after the move in @(São Paulo). Please send my regards to &(Lenira). God willing, my job will be kept. I also hope that the kindergarten situation for &(Tamara) will be peacefully resolved. The fact that &(Mrs. Hahmann) has moved will not make much difference to &(Tamara), I hope, but it is a shame about &(Ella)'s piano lessons.
I thank &(Tamara) for her lines. I kiss and hug her often. Thank God, I am well, I feel healthy, even though this trip is being very tiring.
Thank you very much for the happy birthday wishes. You are also celebrating your birthday these days, my best wishes for happiness and kisses.
While &(Ella) is with you, couldn't you send some books and sheet music to be bound?
The longer I stay away, the more I miss you. At least you have the children, I only have the memory. It's been more than four months since I left, and it will probably be another 2-3 months before I see you again. A long time. When I have work to do or when I'm traveling, my thoughts are diverted, but here, where we make a short stop and everything remains locked in the suitcases on the car, where we can't do anything, there's no lighting at night, then the thoughts come stronger and I feel like I can't bear a few more months of seeing you again. For today, my most tender kisses and hugs, yours &(Brauni).




Letter 51
MB: There is no numbering in the original
1 handwritten page, black ink, lined paper, letterhead:
“@(Parahyba-Hotel) / @(Vidal Square) / @(Joao Pessoa)”


@(Teresina) - capital of Piauí - [Monday] - June 13th
My dear &(Tânia).
I arrived here yesterday in good condition, and today, if everything goes smoothly, we will continue our journey to @(São Luís). This time, you have not heard from me for a long time. However, if I had posted a letter in the interior, it would have arrived even later than this one. In almost all cities, the mail is only sent once a week. In the lands we pass through, the news of the arrival of a truck is a big event, and soon the car is surrounded by a mass of curious people.
We finally left @(Jaicós) on the 9th of this month. The car's radiator was patched with cement as best we could, and we were lucky: we traveled through a dry and sandy region - always very carefully, at a slow speed, stopping a few times to rest - continuing on to Picos, where heavier traffic begins towards the capital of this state. In @(Picos) we came across a smaller truck by chance, which would leave for @(Teresina) that same night. The road conditions are terrible, and you can only go very slowly. This time I didn't have a good seat, because there was a lot of merchandise in the car and also some passengers. It was an endless shaking and rocking. Yesterday, I could barely sit down. Now it's over, thank God. This trip was exhausting and instead of a maximum of 5-6 days, it has already taken us fourteen days to get here. From here to São Luís we will go by train, which should also be very tiring and take about 36 hours. However, the trip so far was very interesting. I saw regions that are not so easy to get to know. There are still huge uninhabited areas around here. Life goes on as it did 50-100 years ago. Teresina is a new city, founded about eighty years ago, and made up only of straight streets and single-story houses. A monotonous view. For today, dear &(Tânia), lots of hugs and tender kisses. I hug you. Yours &(Brauni).


Letter 52
MB: There is no numbering in the original
1 handwritten page, black ink, unlined paper. Back of the letter
n° 51:
“Parahyba-Hotel / Vidal de Negreiros Square / João Pessoa”
[Wednesday] - June 15th
Dear, good Tania.
I arrived here yesterday very tired. The recommended hotel we were looking for was completely occupied, it was raining heavily, and the nearby hotels sent word that they also had no more rooms available. Last night they found us some hammocks and we slept in a storage room. I actually slept well. Today several rooms became free and I'm already settled in better. Last night's trip was very exhausting and lasted fifteen days! A few days in the truck are bearable, but fifteen days without rest is very tiring. Thank God, I feel well and in good spirits. The trip from @(Teresina) to here was extremely tiring. First we crossed the @(Parnaíba River) by boat (an iron bridge is still under construction) and arrived in the state of @(Maranhão). The town at this point is called @(Flores), and from there a train leaves for @(São Luís). Cramped cabins, no dining car, the heat was very penetrating, and it was not allowed to take off your coat. The train travels slowly and there was no news. Every two hours a small village and a stop. The locomotive is heated with wood, and sparks still burning hotly enter through the open windows. From what I can tell so far, I escaped unharmed: my suit is not burned at all. Almost the entire journey, on both sides, there is always the presence of the babassu palm tree, which is very beautiful in itself, but after so much continuous time, it becomes monotonous and hypnotic. Thank God, the journey is over. This morning I took another shower after a long time.
I will send you my address in the airmail. It will take a long time for the mail to reach you from here. Kiss &(Tamara) and &(Renata) for me. All the best to my relatives, lots of hugs to all my acquaintances &(Popular Choir!). I miss you so much!
My tender kisses and hugs.
Your old man &(Brauni).




Letter 53
MB: There is no numbering in the original
1 handwritten page, black ink, unlined paper, letterhead:
On the left: “Hotel Central - Avenida Manoel Borba, 209 - Teleg. End.
HOTOEN - Telep. 2051-2052-2053 - Recife - Pernambuco - Brazil; on the right:
“By Air”
[Wednesday] - June 15, 194
Dear, better Tania.
Finally yesterday, after a very exhausting, tiring fifteen-day trip on the truck, we arrived here in good condition. You, poor thing, this time you spent a long time without news, but it was better not to post letters in the interior. Even from the capital it takes long enough. We will stay here for another five days, and then we will travel to @(Belém). But this time, with a reliable ship it will be safe. In @(João Pessoa), everyone said that the trip to @(São Luís) is always made by ship, because it is cheaper, faster and more comfortable. There are no real roads by land, there is no help, far or near, if something breaks down. And that is exactly what happened: terrible roads, we made a mistake once, and a part of the car broke. Luckily, it was near a city, because if it had been hours away from this place, we would have had a lot to do. So, a 4-5 day trip by ship turned into fifteen days by land. But, finally, we arrived. The last news from you I had was in @(João Pessoa): two airmail letters in a row, and on the day of our departure, your simple letter of May 17th with the beautiful photographs, for which I am immensely grateful, as they brought me great and profound joy. Please write in the meantime to: MB posta-restante, @(Belém), @(Pará).
This letter is leaving tomorrow and should reach you about the time I am leaving from here for @(Belém), where we are expected to stay longer, so that your news will reach me there. I will tell you all about our trip later. I miss you very much and look forward to the day when I will be with you again. The weeks go by very quickly. I feel very lonely and abandoned. I miss you. @(São Luís) is situated on a large island by the sea and seems to be a clean and very friendly city. The hotel we are staying at seems to be the best in the place, but it is very old-fashioned and rickety. We came from @(Teresina), the capital of @(Piauí), by train. It was very tiring. Our journey from @(João Pessoa) went all the way through @(Paraíba). The last city of @(Paraíba) is called @(Cajazeiras), then we continued through the southern part of @(Ceará), through the cities of @(Lavras), @(Crato), then through @(Serra do Araripe) until the State of @(Piauí), where we passed through the cities of @(Socorro), @(Jaicós), @(Picos), @(Valença), @(Natal) and @(Teresina). From @(Teresina), we passed over the @(Parnaíba River), which is the border with the State of @(Maranhão), we continued until @(Flores) and from there by train until here, @(São Luís), where we arrived yesterday very tired but all well.
I hug you with all my heart, I wish you all the best. Please, kiss &(Tamara) and &(Renata) tenderly for me. The most affectionate hugs and kisses. Your old &(Brauni). Please write soon!


Letter 54
MB: There is no numbering in the original
2 handwritten pages, black ink, lined paper, letterhead:
“Parahyba-Hotel / Vidal de Negreiros Square / João Pessoa”
Sao Luis [MA] - [Friday] - June 17th
My dear &(Tânia).
Next Monday, the 20th of this month, we will travel by ship to @(Belém). According to a statement from @(São Paulo), we should not count on any financial support! According to what &(Saia) told me, we still have 12 thousand and of that we have to set aside 5 thousand for the return trip. At the rate we are going, I believe that with the remaining money we will arrive more or less by the end of July, so it will be another fifteen days of travel by ship from @(Belém) to @(Santos), so that by mid-August at the latest I will be with you there in @(São Paulo). The time has finally come when I can speak with certainty about the return trip. My return could eventually be postponed if some government here paid our expenses, as happened in @(Paraíba), but I believe that this will hardly happen again. I will be in @(São Paulo) in August anyway, and I am immensely happy to be able to see you again.
Today I have to consult you about the execution of a plan. It refers to the money I borrowed in @(Recife) to pay the dentist. It is $850,000. Please call &(Mário) and ask him on my behalf what he thinks about the following: we need all the money for our expenses here. Personally, I do not have $850 available to pay back. I therefore ask &(Mário) if he thinks it feasible for &(Nicanor), or rather, for &(Parques Infantilis), to advance me this amount, making it immediately available to our &(Mission), and sending us the sum through &(Discoteca). When I return, I would return the money in installments of $100,000 - that is, in a maximum of eight months. Since the composition of the board of directors has changed, I do not know if this plan is possible. &(Mário) should know, and if possible, I ask him to follow up on whatever is necessary. From @(João Pessoa), I wrote at least three times to &(Bosch) in @(Recife) without receiving any response. As I have already said, I left my cape and my blue suit with him for safekeeping. Now I will write once more. On the return trip, the ship will be docked for almost an entire day in @(Recife), and so I will have plenty of time to deal with this.
I have recovered very well from the trip. I also got to know this city better: it is one of the oldest in @(Brazil) and one of the largest in @(North). Old houses are completely covered in tiles, houses that shine in all colors, but blue and white are predominant. If in the #backlands there is a lack of rain, here it rains a lot. So far not a day has gone by without it raining at least 3-4 times, and always torrential rain. The hotel we are staying in is from the last century, and is reputed to be the best in the place. However, part of the hotel seems to want to collapse on itself at any moment. On the other hand, there are many old houses in the city that are better preserved and maintained. In the port, there is a wide bay with neighboring houses, and further out of the city, the green forest. It is very beautiful. Unfortunately, ships cannot dock at the pier. They have to stay offshore and anchor in the bay - the appropriate facilities are still missing. In the next few days, I will take some photographs. So far I have not had much luck with photos. The sun here may be too strong for my little camera. However, some of the photos may be good, and it's a shame that I don't know how to take good photos. There's usually too much light. I wanted to send these photos home, but now my return trip is approaching, and I'd rather take them with me. So far I've only used four films. I'm not very happy about it, because I really can't take nice photos. Who knows, maybe later we can buy a better camera.
It's been three weeks since I heard from you. Haven't you written to @(João Pessoa) anymore? I hope everything is fine with you and the children! Did you get my long letter from my trip? What is &(Tamara) doing? Is she still happily going to school? It won't be long before I can take her to and from there. And what is &(Renata) doing? Is she growing? And you, are you happy with her? Does she still cry at night? How is &(Mamma) doing? Did she come back from @(Bragança) and is she visiting you? What's new with &(Coral Popular)? Has it grown, improved and is it singing in public again? How are your students doing? Have new ones arrived? Life in @(São Paulo) got more expensive, the landlord didn't talk about raising the rent anymore? How is &(Waldemar) doing? Is he making progress? Please say hello to him for me. Say hello to &(Paulo) and his family too. Please write soon to @(Belém), @(Pará), posta-restante. For today, my tender hugs and kisses to all of you. Hug yourself tenderly, your &(Brauni).


Letter 55
MB: There is no numbering in the original
1 handwritten page, black ink, unlined, letterhead on the back:
“Hotel Central - Avenida Manoel Borba, 209 - Teleg. Address HOTOEN - Telep.
2051-2052-2053 - Recife - Pernambuco - Brazil; on the right: “Via Aérea”
[ship] Itapagé - [Tuesday] - June 21st
My dear, good &(Tânia)!
Yesterday afternoon, we left @(São Luís). Fate would have it that we used the same ship that we used to leave @(Santos). Tomorrow morning we should arrive at @(Belém). It is almost certain that our stay there will not be long. The money we still have is enough for another 15-20 days, depending on the expenses we still have to incur. If everything goes very well, the money will last a little longer and will be enough for the return trip, which costs, just from @(Belém) to @(Santos), for us and our luggage, about 5 thousand. So, in a little over a month, I will be with you again - and I am happy about that.
I wrote to &(Mário) and to you in a simple letter, which will probably arrive after this one. Since the mail conditions are not entirely reliable, I will repeat the part referring to the money I borrowed in @(Recife) for my teeth. It is 850$000. Since I do not have this amount to return, I have to pay it in installments after I return. But here the money is missing. Please call &(Mário) and ask on my behalf if he thinks it is possible for me to borrow this money from &(Parques Infantilis), sending it here through &(Discoteca). After my return, I would pay this debt in monthly installments. &(Mário) understands these matters better and should know if this is possible. If possible, I ask him to make the necessary arrangements. If here at the hotel we pay more or less 20$000 per person, for four people it would be 80$000 per day. We would stay here for another ten days if we had the $850,000 available.
In any case, our trip is coming to an end, and as expected, it should last about six months. Write to @(Belém), poste restante, and please quickly, because this may be the last letter I will receive from you. In any case, I will continue to write to you, informing you exactly where I am. We will probably not go to the interior anymore, because we do not have the money. Financial support from the Government of @(Pará) can hardly be expected, because these gentlemen have other concerns.
The ship is out at sea, and the coast is not visible. It is not as warm as I expected, and the constant wind is a bit refreshing. Even with not very high waves, the ship rocks quite a bit.
Thank God, I am well and feeling well. I have not heard from you for a long time. I received your last letter in @(João Pessoa) before we left for here. I hope that you, &(Tamara) and &(Renata) are well, I hope so with all my heart. In @(Belém), after my arrival, I intend to add a few more lines.
For today, lots of kisses and hugs. Your old &(Brauni).




Letter 56 [cont. 55]
MB: There is no numbering in the original
½ handwritten page, black ink, unlined, letterhead on the back:
“Hotel Central - Avenida Manoel Borba, 209 - Teleg. Address HOTOEN - Telep.
2051-2052-2053 - Recife - Pernambuco - Brazil; on the right: “Via Aérea”
@(Belém) [PA] - [Wednesday] - June 22nd
My dear Tania.
I arrived here last night, well and in torrential rain. Our stay is indefinite. Please do not write here again. Just in case, I will ask at the post office before we leave. I will be in @(São Paulo) sooner than I thought. @(Belém) is a large, beautiful and well-situated city. All around, only forest. I am fine.
Tender hugs and kisses.
Your &(Brauni).


Letter 57
MB: There is no numbering in the original
4 handwritten pages, black ink, lined paper, letterhead:
“Grande Hotel / Republic Square / Telegraphic Address: GRANDOTEL
/ @(Belém) - @(Pará) - @(Brazil)”
@(Belém) [PA] - [Thursday] - June 23rd
My dear &(Tânia).
You have probably already received the airmail from @(São Luís) and @(Belém). Our stay in @(Belém) will be short. It could be longer if the &(City Council) or the &(State Government) paid our expenses, but we cannot wait for that. Our money will last more or less until the end of the month. After that, I will return home, to you, to @(São Paulo). From what &(Mário) wrote, we should not expect anything from the &(Culture Department), not even any money. In @(São Paulo), a lot has probably changed since Mário stopped directing the Department. Several divisions will be modified, reduced or completely abandoned. It is a good thing that we are at the end of the time initially planned for our trip. If we were halfway through, our Mission could eventually be interrupted. Now it is no longer worth it. In order to better perform our task, to obtain a more complete collection, we would have to have years at our disposal. I already have a good selection of music from all the places we have been, but it is only reasonably complete for the state of Paraíba, where we stayed for two months. The states up here are frighteningly large in size, and in each location you will find different genres of songs. In general, the most interesting songs are found in the most remote huts. It takes time to find these huts and the singers. Transportation conditions are generally not the best. If we were to travel through a state without any gaps, it would take several months. And there are many states in the northeast and north of the country. We arrived just in time for the São João festival, the most popular here. Today, people are already walking around with green leaves and a type of moss on their heads. In their hands, they carry certain plants home, from which they prepare a bath: the bath of happiness 200. Whoever bathes in this bath is filled with luck and blessings until the following year. Many popular games and celebrations are also performed and performed during these days. In the port, near the market, you can see many sailboats arriving from the many nearby islands and from the mainland, always selling their products, mainly agricultural. Traffic is almost exclusively on water. You can also see boats, called cages, which transport people and cargo between Manaus and Belém. Manaus is the capital of Amazonas. One of these cages has just arrived, loaded with Brazil nuts, which are unloaded and taken away by truck. Other large ships can also be seen in the port, almost all of them Brazilian. One of the city's attractions is the well-kept Goeldi Park. There, you can see large and small birds of rare colors, from Pará and Amazonas and from neighboring states. It's a real wonder! There are long-legged birds, long, thin beaks, and a beautiful red color. There are also many parrots and the beloved monkeys, large and small, many forest animals, fish, and an unusual variety of plants and trees. In comparison, orchids are at a disadvantage: I saw only a few stunted plants, and right here, in the woods, which must be a paradise for orchids. I would love to take a parrot or a small monkey to Tamara, but that won't be possible. Animals are not allowed on the ship. I don't have enough money either. I have everything I need to live well, but there's nothing left over to buy anything that isn't essential. The hundred thousand réis a month are quickly spent on laundry, cigarettes, etc. Besides, everything is absurdly expensive up here. A film that costs $4,000 in São Paulo, I pay $5,000 here. Developing is also more expensive, and that's how it is. When we compare the prices of these expenses, we realize the difference. There are no industries here. The goods are brought in from outside and the long transport costs money - the middlemen also want to make a profit. Water, you should only drink mineral water. Regular water is impure, and a bottle of mineral water costs at least $2,000. Life is expensive here. The simple people live in very modest conditions in their straw huts. They live off fish, game and fruit. There is something unique about the city: all the streets are lined with mango trees, many avenues with gigantic trees, whose shade allows you to stay outside even at noon, if it is not raining. The population has a strong indigenous influence: they are generally short, with broad faces and slanted eyes. I, with my height, can be quite surprising 201. When you travel around the city by tram, you can feel like you have been transported to any other city in Europe: on the main streets, the houses, shops and cafés have a European or North American appearance. Now I have the right to say: see you soon, happy in @(São Paulo). By the time these lines reach you, I will probably already be on my return trip. Please greet all your relatives, friends and acquaintances. Kiss and hug &(Tamara) and &(Renata) for me. I hug you and wish you all the best.
Your old man &(Brauni).




Letter 58
MB: There is no numbering in the original
1 handwritten page, black ink, lined paper, letterhead:
“Grande Hotel / Republic Square / Telegraphic Address: GRANDOTEL
/ @(Belém) - @(Pará) - @(Brazil)”
@(Belém) [PA] - [Sunday] - June 27th
My dear Tania.
Then, in mid-July, thank God, I will be with you again. In this way, our trip will not even last the expected six months. I am very happy to see you again soon. It has been a long time since I heard from you - a whole month! I hope you have received all my letters. This morning we returned by ship from a nearby island - @(Mosqueiro) - where we spent another two days. We were told that there is a lot of popular music sung there. However, we only found the latest hits on the radio and the gramophone 202. The island itself is very beautiful with excellent conditions for swimming. Wide beaches with fine sand. You should see the huge fish that are taken from the river. They weigh up to two hundred kilos, and their meat is very good. The population does not lack for fish, which is also their staple food. Are you already happy about my arrival, Tamara? When I know more precisely about the departure, I will write to you immediately by airmail. I am being called. For now, a big hug and kisses. Yours &(Brauni).
_______________________
I have just come from the post office, where I asked if there was a letter for me, and again there was nothing. There might be news of you, because from @(São Luís) I communicated my address in @(Belém) in an airmail dated the 16th of this month 203. According to my calculations, you could have received this letter on the 21st, and if you had replied right away, there might have been a reply from you here today. I hope that everything is well with you and the children, that they are all healthy. I also hope that everything is well with &(Mamma), &(Mischa), &(Dima) and their families. We will still have work to do in the next few days. Then, probably on July 1st, we will board the ship and head home. In mid-July, the ship will arrive in Santos. Here we would need much more time to find the right places and people, because in the city all the songs I heard are heavily influenced by the radio, by ready-made and manufactured ballroom music. Belém is a big garden city. If there weren't so many trees, I'm sure I would barely be able to bear the heat and sunlight. Except for the great lack of you, I'm doing very well. Hugs to all, kisses. All the best. Yours &(Brauni).
(Please keep the enclosed stamp)


Letter 59
MB: There is no numbering in the original
1 handwritten page, black ink, lined paper, letterhead:
“Grande Hotel / Republic Square / Telegraphic Address: GRANDOTEL
/ @(Belém) - @(Pará) - @(Brazil)”
@(Belém) [PA] - [Thursday] - June 30th
Dear &(Tania).
I received your airmail yesterday. Thank you very much. Our departure for @(Santos) - @(São Paulo) is provisionally scheduled for July 3, but it is quite possible that we will leave a few days later. There are enough ships. The trip from here to Santos takes about 13-14 days. I will send these lines only when I can say for sure: today or tomorrow I leave with the ship... In the meantime, I hope you have received my letter from @(São Luís), written during the trip from @(João Pessoa) to @(São Luís). In spite of everything, I must deduce from your lines that you accepted the job at the Café. As I have already said in a simple letter and another airmail from @(João Pessoa), I do not like this job of yours. Now it has happened. Probably after a month you will already be feeling how tiring and unpleasant this work is. Did you leave all your students or just some? Does &(Nenê) stay at night with the children or did you have to hire another maid? Of course, you can't work much during the day... The job is tiring, isn't it? What was the reason for you to accept this job? And how are you doing with &(Renata)? Does she still have to be breastfed every three hours? From what you wrote, &(Tamara) spends a lot of time alone. I hope she becomes more independent soon and we can leave her alone. &(Mamma) is still coming? I probably won't receive the simple letter you announced. If you put it in the mail on June 20th, it should arrive around July 5th, and I'll hardly be around on that day. I'll be really happy when I'm home with you again. It's been six months since I was away from you. For me, thank God, time has passed quickly, because I rarely
I had some free time to let my thoughts run their course. However, the return trip will be long and there is not much change on the ship. It rains every day here, almost always a very generous rain. Life is very expensive, and especially expensive for those who are not from here. Everything, or almost everything, is directed towards the outsider. At least that is what can be seen today, when the rubber production of the State of Pará has lost almost all of its value, and this once rich gold mine has dried up without any replacement. The facilities and beautiful houses in the big city are almost all from the golden age of rubber production.


Letter 60 [cont. 59]
MB: There is no numbering in the original
1 handwritten page, black ink, lined paper, no letterhead
@(Belém) [PA] - [Saturday] - July 2nd
The departure is scheduled for July 7th. When you receive these lines, you can reply by poste restante to @(São Luís), where I will be on the 9th. If you are not sure that the letter will reach me in @(São Luís), then it is better to write to @(Recife) where I will certainly find it, as the ship will arrive there on the 12th and should stay for a day. That way, I will still be able to receive your promised letter. I am fine. I will be with you at the end of this month. Please greet all relatives, friends and acquaintances! Kiss &(Tamara) and &(Renata) for me. Hugs to you. Yours &(Brauni).


Letter 61
MB: There is no numbering in the original
1 handwritten page on the back, black ink, unlined paper, letterhead:
“Hotel Central - Avenida Manoel Borba, 209 - Teleg. Address HOTOEN - Telep.
2051-2052-2053 - Recife - Pernambuco - Brazil; on the right: “Via Aérea”
@(Belém) [PA] - [Monday] - July 4th
My dear Tania.
Your letter from the 20th of this month arrived today, along with the kind words from &(Tamara). Thank you very much. I sincerely hope that &(Tamara) is well and no longer in bed. As I have already written, our departure is scheduled for the 7th of this month, so that on July 20th we will arrive in @(Santos). &(Ladeira) will go and buy the tickets. Now, I really believe that we will leave from here, because the money is running out. A letter from you must have gotten lost, because you write about subjects about which I know nothing. Did you write to @(São Luís)? I did not receive any letter from you there. On the way back, when we pass by there again, I will ask. Did you write to @(João Pessoa), when I had already left there? We will arrive in @(Recife) on the 12th of this month and continue on the evening of the same day towards @(Bahia). It would be a great joy to find a letter from you in @(Recife) - as was suggested in the last letter. What happened to the pajamas you sent to @(João Pessoa)? Do you know anything about it? I never got to see them or hold them in my hands. Is there any prospect of getting them back? Maybe there is a way to ask for the package back at the post office!? I'm sorry about the money. Your observations about the &(Department) and about &(Mário) are not very clear. There are probably explanations about them in the lost letter. Will the &(Department) be dismantled? Will my job be in danger? I know I won't get an answer to this letter any time soon and, therefore, it is better to keep my doubts for @(São Paulo). I cannot believe that the &(Popular Choir) will be dissolved. My last contract, which is still valid for one year, was only with the &(Children's Parks). God willing nothing will happen, just now that I have also left the &(Conservatory). As I wrote last time, your decision to accept the job at the Café seemed a bit hasty to me. However, now it has happened, and perhaps you made the right decision. I don't like that you are sacrificing so much. However, in @(São Paulo), we will talk more about it. That is, if you can handle the job until then. Have you joined the &(Centrum Musical) yet? Don't you get very tense all day long? Now it won't be long before I will be with you and all of you again. Kiss &(Tamara) and &(Renata) for me. I miss you deeply. Hug yourself, your &(Brauni).


Letter 62 [cont. 61]
MB: There is no numbering in the original
1 handwritten page on the back, black ink, unlined paper, letterhead:
“Hotel Central - Avenida Manoel Borba, 209 - Teleg. Address HOTOEN - Telep.
2051-2052-2053 - @(Recife) - @(Pernambuco) - @(Brazil); on the right: “Via Aérea”
@(Belém) [PA] - [Wednesday] - July 6th
Good &(Tania).
The ship tickets for the trip to @(Santos) were bought yesterday. According to the plans, we will leave tomorrow at 7:00 p.m. The ship is good and is called Itanagé, belonging to &(Companhia de Navegação Costeira), and should arrive in @(Santos) on the 20th of this month. Now, it is unlikely that anything will happen, since the seats are already reserved. A ticket costs more than 850$000. If everything goes well, I will be in @(Santos) - @(São Paulo) in fourteen days. I am very happy about that. As always, precisely in the last days before any trip, there is a lot of work. Here it is the same: I work yesterday, today and probably again tomorrow. In @(Recife) I hope to find a letter from you. Now, it is time to pack my bags again for the return trip. Pack my bags for the last time. I am really sorry that I will not be able to take anything with me. I also thought it would be very different. First, because everything here is very expensive, much more expensive than in @(São Paulo), and second because I haven't found anything characteristic yet. Most of what you find here comes from the Southern States. A handbag made of snakeskin costs from 300 to 400$000. In @(São Paulo), you can find it for
less. It's full of English and Americans here. They buy everything they see and pay a lot of money. That's probably why the prices are so high. In the interior we saw many interesting objects among the Indians and other residents. But here we won't go to the interior. Belém is very European, it has very little of the Brazilian city. Life here is also very urban. Thank you again for your letter. &(Tamara)'s words made me very happy. Are the new zipi-zipi alive or artificial? Who did she get them from? Finally, tomorrow we'll go home! For a new, healthy and happy reunion! My warmest hugs and kisses. All the best. Yours &(Brauni).


Letter 63
MB: There is no numbering in the original
1/3 of a handwritten page, black ink, unlined paper, letterhead: “Grande Hotel / Praça da República / Telegraphic Address: GRANDOTEL / @(Belém) - @(Pará) - @(Brazil)”
Between @(Belém) [PA] and @(São Luís) [MA] - [Friday] - July 8th
My dear good &(Tânia).
Now it's serious about my return trip. Last night, after 8:30 p.m., we left on the Itanagé, a sister ship of the Itapagé, which we came on. There is probably a travel plan for the ships, but it doesn't quite work out: there is a day's difference. According to this plan, we should arrive in @(Santos) on the 20th, but this is on paper. Hours are not counted, only days. I will send you these lines from @(Recife).


Letter 64 [cont.63]
MB: There is no numbering in the original
1/3 of a handwritten page, black ink, unlined paper, letterhead: “Grande Hotel / Praça da República / Telegraphic Address: GRANDOTEL / @(Belém) - @(Pará) - @(Brazil)”
After São Luís [MA] - [Saturday] - July 9th


The first stop on our journey home is behind us. The day after tomorrow, we will arrive in the capital of @(Ceará), @(Fortaleza). Unfortunately, I didn't find any letters in the post office in @(São Luís). I think one of your letters was lost. We arrived early in the morning in @(São Luís), and anchor was raised after 5 p.m. I feel ready and I'm counting the days that still separate me from you. It must be cold in São Paulo by now. @(Nenê) is going to have a lot of work with my clothes: there are a lot of buttons missing, socks need to be mended, and I'm going to take a lot of dirty clothes, since there's no way to wash them here. How are you doing with your tiring work? Are you still able to master everything? I'll be home soon and you'll be able to tell me everything in detail. The ship is almost full of passengers. The food is plentiful, but not tasty. Here in @(Norte) the days pass quickly. After @(Bahia) I think it will take longer. Tender kisses for today, your @(Brauni).


Letter 65 [cont. 63]
MB: There is no numbering in the original
1/4 handwritten page, black ink, unlined paper, letterhead: “Grande Hotel / Praça da República / Telegraphic Address: GRANDOTEL / @(Belém) - @(Pará) - @(Brazil)”
[in transit] - Sunday - July 10th
Today, a wonderful morning. All around, only water. In general, only a trace of land can be seen. The water is calm, a refreshing wind at all hours. I am ready and I begin to rest a little. My thoughts are with you.


Letter 66 [cont. 63]
MB: There is no numbering in the original
1/3 of a handwritten page, black ink, unlined paper, letterhead: “Grande Hotel / Praça da República / Telegraphic Address: GRANDOTEL / @(Belém) - @(Pará) - @(Brazil)”
[in transit] - Monday - 11 [July]


Today I was in @(Fortaleza). The way to disembark is a bit unpleasant, because there is no pier and the waves are relatively high. Boarding and disembarking in the boat that takes passengers to land requires acrobatic skills. Fortaleza is a clean city, practically straight and with a lot of commerce. Everything seems to be geared towards commerce. If we had money, we could buy many interesting objects. However, it is necessary to inform yourself because the sellers, as in @(Greece), ask for at least double the real price. There are many types of hammocks. From what I heard, @(Fortaleza) has the best, the best known and the largest hammock industry in Brazil. The city spreads out flat, almost at sea level. Some planted trees, parks and on the beach, large coconut plantations. In the background, you can see some hills. And the heat is so intense that it gave me a headache. Tonight, we will leave @(Fortaleza). The day after tomorrow, I will be in Recife. For today, lots of kisses. Yours &(Brauni).


Letter 67 [cont. 63]
MB: There is no numbering in the original
1/3 of a handwritten page, black ink, unlined paper, no letterhead


After @(Macau) [RN] - Tuesday -12 [July]
We saw nothing of the city: the ship is moored far away. Here, salt is loaded. Four large sailboats deposit sacks of salt weighing about fifty kilos each on Itanagé. This takes from early morning until almost 2 pm. From land, I could only see a narrow strip of sand, sometimes becoming a higher mound of sand. Tonight, we should arrive at @(Natal), the capital of the state of @(Rio Grande do Norte). So, we are slowly heading home. In a week's time, the ship should arrive at @(Santos), if nothing unexpected happens. So far, the trip has gone more or less according to plan. Have you told &(Tamara) that I will be arriving soon? I hope you received my letter from @(Belém)? I think a lot about you, &(Tamara) and our home. May God grant that I find everyone healthy! Warm kisses, your &(Brauni).


Letter 68 [cont. 63]
MB: There is no numbering in the original
1/3 of a handwritten page on the back, black ink, unlined paper, letterhead:
“Grande Hotel / Republic Square / Telegraphic Address: GRANDOTEL
/ Belem-Pará-Brazil”
After Christmas [RN] - Wednesday - July 13th
We are already one day late on our trip. We will arrive in Recife tomorrow, not today. @(Natal) is a small town with remarkably low single-story houses. A new three-story hotel is under construction - a large building for @(Natal). The streets are generally narrow and life is no better than in a small provincial town. The difference is that here there are many public buildings, since it is the capital of @(Rio Grande do Norte). I am again in the @(Northeast) of @(Brazil), in the arid zone. Here too, you see only sand and more sand. Life must be poor. However, it seems that recently there has been a movement of progress, because many houses are under construction. If the trip continues as slowly as it has been going so far, I will not be home in a week. And I can hardly wait to be with you again. Tomorrow I hope to find a letter from you in @(Recife). Kisses and hugs for today, your &(Brauni).




Letter 69 [cont. letter 63]
MB: There is no numbering in the original
2/3 of a handwritten page on the back, black ink, unlined paper, letterhead:
“Grande Hotel / Republic Square / Telegraphic Address: GRANDOTEL
/ Belem-Pará-Brazil”
@(Recife) [PE] - Thursday - 14th [July]
I arrived this morning, in good condition, here in @(Recife). Until @(Rio), we will still lose another day, so that instead of arriving in @(Santos) - @(São Paulo) on the 20th of this month, I will only arrive on the 22nd. It is very unpleasant that ships do not meet deadlines. Slowly, but I hope safely, I will arrive at home next week, with you. I received your dear letter, thank you very much. It is difficult to determine the exact date of arrival, as I have already written. I am immensely happy that everyone is well and that Tamara is also well again. I hope the ship does not lose too much time loading and unloading the merchandise. The &(Bosch) company has new owners. &(Bosch) himself is traveling. I went to his house and took out my clothes that were there. When I opened the package already on board the ship, there were only the blue suit pants. Now I do not remember for sure: did I bring only one or two pairs of pants? Just in case, I'll stop by &(Bosch)'s house again and ask. Let me just say this: I would have preferred to have paid the $850,000 in installments, because &(Mário) told me that it would only have to be completely paid by the end of the year. We'll be leaving today at 8:00 p.m. Hugs to you. Say hello to all my acquaintances! Your Brauni.


Letter 70 [cont. 63]
MB: There is no numbering in the original
2/3 of a handwritten page on the back, black ink, unlined paper, letterhead:
“Grande Hotel / Republic Square / Telegraphic Address: GRANDOTEL
/ Belem-Pará-Brazil”
@(Recife) [PE] - Thursday - 14 213 [July]
Good &(Tania),


I am a little closer to you again. Now I must tell you about &(Bosch). When I went to his shop this morning, I could no longer find his house. After asking around a few times, I discovered that &(Bosch)'s business had new owners. So I looked for &(Bosch)'s new place of business. There, they told me that &(Bosch) was traveling, but that he would be back in the afternoon with the ship. Just in case, I asked for &(Bosch)'s home address, and went to get the clothes I had left with him on the outward journey to be stored. &(Bosch) was supposed to return at 4:00 p.m.; at that time, I was at the port waiting for him. However, the ship only arrived around 7:00 p.m. and the Itanagé was due to leave shortly after 8:00 p.m. So I was only able to spend an hour with him. He is fine and sends his regards to you. During our conversation, I discovered that the pajamas we thought were lost had been in his shop for a long time, but he had not been able to let me know. It was too late to pick up the package today. He will send it to @(São Paulo) in a few days. I am glad that the pajamas still exist and that I will receive them, even if it is very late. I really wanted to take pictures in @(Recife), but I was unlucky: the sun did not shine all day and it rained almost all the time. In weather like this, you could not ride the tram either. I spent all these hours on the ship and read a lot. There was an English warship in the port. Boats and ships were coming and going, a large quantity of merchandise was loaded. So there was plenty of distraction for me. After a long time, I am reading a decent newspaper again. These lines will be posted in @(Rio), and there I will know and be able to inform the exact time of arrival in @(Santos). It is sad that I cannot take a single orchid: it seemed like a curse, I could not pick any. From today to the week I will be with you, my dear. More than half of the return trip is already behind me. Many kisses.


Letter 71 [cont. 63]
MB: There is no numbering in the original
1/3 of a handwritten page on the back, black ink, unlined paper, letterhead:
“Grand Hotel / Republic Square / Telegraphic Address: GRANDOTEL / Belém-Pará-Brazil”
near Bahia [BA] - Saturday - 16 [July]


Yesterday we were in @(Maceió), the capital of @(Alagoas). The ship is anchored far away, because the port is still under construction and the reception area has not yet been prepared. I stayed on the ship: the weather was not particularly good and everything is very expensive. From yesterday to today, the ship rocked a lot and many passengers got sick. We should only arrive in @(Bahia) today - another delay. If everything goes well, we will be in @(Rio) on Tuesday, where the ship normally stays stopped for two days to load and unload. For me, these days are passing very slowly: after all, it is still a fourteen-day sea voyage. I think that is a long time.


Letter 72 [cont. 63]
MB: There is no numbering in the original
2/3 of a handwritten page, black ink, unlined paper, letterhead: “Grande Hotel / Praça da República / Telegraphic Address: GRANDOTEL / Belém- Pará-Brazil”
After @(Bahia) [BA] - Saturday - July 16th


Bahia was also left behind. The ship only stayed in port for a few hours. It's a shame, because there's a good pier here and you can go ashore comfortably. Here, we only stayed a few hours and in @(Maceió), where we stopped far from land, the ship stayed anchored for a whole day. I've been unlucky with the weather. Not only because of the ship, which has been rocking a lot these past few days, but also with taking pictures. There's not much to do with this rainy weather. In @(Recife) I wasn't able to take even one picture, and that's precisely where there are so many beautiful images. In @(Maceió) it was also raining. I only took four pictures, and it still wasn't exactly what I wanted. I hope I'll have better luck with the weather in @(Rio)! Now there are only four days left of the trip and soon I'll be with you, holding you in my arms. Today doesn't count, because I'm tired and I'll go to bed soon. So, only Sunday, Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday are left. Thursday doesn't count either, because on that day, God willing, I will be arriving in @(São Paulo). In @(Salvador), many passengers boarded. The ship is full and now we have little freedom of movement. Salvador is a very well located city, with good transportation conditions and in every little aspect a progressive city. The large and wide bay is wonderful. During the departure, we had a sunset of rare beauty. The sea seemed covered in fire. For today, warm hugs and all the best. Yours &(Brauni).


Letter 73 [cont. 63]
MB: There is no numbering in the original
1/3 of a handwritten page, black ink, unlined paper, letterhead: “Grande Hotel / Praça da República / Telegraphic Address: GRANDOTEL / Belém-Pará-Brazil”
[in transit] - Sunday - July 17th


We were at sea all day with the sky covered in clouds, sometimes raining. A melancholy day. Tomorrow we will arrive in @(Vitória), the capital of @(Espírito Sant)o, and on Tuesday in @(Rio). When the ship rocks there is nothing you can do. At these times, the hours pass very slowly. However, everything has its end and this trip will also have its end.


Letter 74 [cont. 63]
MB: There is no numbering in the original
1/3 of a handwritten page, black ink, unlined paper, no letterhead
After @(Vitória) [ES] - Monday - July 18th


Now this port is also behind us. Tomorrow, before lunch, we should arrive at @(Rio). The weather has improved a little, the waves are not so high and the ship is not rocking as much. In @(Vitória), whose wonderful entrance I already described on my outward journey, we stayed a little over two hours. Thank God, I am very well and I think more and more about you, about my arrival in @(São Paulo) and about home!




Letter 75 [cont. 63]
MB: There is no numbering in the original
2/3 of a handwritten page, black ink, unlined paper, letterhead: “Grande Hotel / Praça da República / Telegraphic Address: GRANDOTEL / @(Belém) - @(Pará) - @(Brazil)”
in @(Rio) [de Janeiro] [RJ] - Tuesday - July 19th


We arrived safely this morning. I wanted to ask you to meet me before, but now I think it's better for you to stay home and take care of your business calmly. My arrival in @(Santos) is still very uncertain. Tomorrow afternoon, the ship leaves here and arrives in Santos on Thursday morning. Nobody knows the exact time. In any case, on Thursday, the day after tomorrow, after 12:00 (???) I should arrive home. I hope and wish that everything is fine with you and the little ones. See you later, the day after tomorrow. My kisses and hugs from the bottom of my heart, hugs to you, your &(Brauni).


