[1-2]


@(Santos) [SP] - [Saturday] - February 5, 38
After many delays, we finally left yesterday, February 4th, at 10am, from the Luz Train Station. &(Tatiana) and &(Tamara) accompanied me from home. At the station, I found my traveling companions &(Luiz Saia), &(Pacheco) and &(Antônio Ladeira) already waiting for me, as well as &(Mário de Andrade) and my two students, &(Dinorá de Carvalho) 5 and &(Suzy Nyxon). &(Fructuoso Vianna) arrived later to say goodbye. The train was already moving when &(Tamara) started crying loudly. She probably wanted to go along. The train arrived promptly at 12:10pm in @(Santos) and we went straight to the Washington Hotel. Unfortunately, our ship has not arrived yet, so we have to wait until tomorrow. Thus, we spent our first day in @(Santos). We went to the sea, visited several interesting places, and at night, very tired, went to bed. Today, Saturday, we woke up early and well rested. Now we are going to see if the ship has arrived and if there is still room for us.




[2-3]


(on the ship Itapagé) - Sunday - February 6th
Our ship - Itapagé - arrived two days late. Instead of Friday, we left @(Santos) today. Yesterday we put in order what was left to do and went to see several interesting places. We took a nice bath at @(Gonzaga beach). Today, the ship was supposed to leave in the morning, then in the afternoon, promptly at 2:00 p.m. In fact, we only left at 3:30 p.m. At the moment it is 7:00 p.m. and we are more or less in front of @(São Sebastião). For me it is like a providence from the higher world that I am making this trip now. I arrived in @(Brazil) ten years ago and I am relatively satisfied considering the time and circumstances of when I arrived here. Naturally, in so many years we end up getting very used to the conditions that surround us and becoming somewhat bourgeois in our way of seeing things - for a musician the worst thing that can happen! That is why I am happy to be away from my daily work in @(São Paulo) for a few months, to see a lot of new things and, I hope, to be able to return reborn in body and soul. In the last few years, I have invested and lost a lot in spiritual vigor. May God grant that I may find more strength for work again. The ship - Itapagé - of &(Coast Shipping Company), is very clean and well-kept. There are relatively few passengers. The fully loaded ship moves calmly and hardly rocks. I sleep in a spacious cabin with &(Pacheco); &(Luiz) and &(Antônio) in another. I am happy that we chose this beautiful ship. Tomorrow morning, we will arrive in beautiful @(Rio de Janeiro).


[4-5]
@(Rio) [de Janeiro] [RJ] - Monday - February 7th
Today I got up early so as not to miss the famous entrance to @(Rio). Unfortunately, the sky was covered in clouds. Nothing could be seen of the already familiar and beautiful mountain backdrop. Even so, the pleasant calm that reigned was dominating. Sometimes, the rocks - large masses of stone - could be seen through the clouds. At 9:30 a.m., our brave ship docked at the pier and we all went ashore together, heading for the city. It is indescribable and hard to believe how @(Rio) has changed in recent years, especially on the outskirts, since I was here for the first and last time. Many tall buildings have appeared and dominate the entire image of the city. The gardens, the avenues, the omnipresent green of the plants are also beautiful - a city of gardens. In the afternoon, I went with &(Antônio) to @(Copacabana beach) and further on, to @(Leblon). Beautiful beaches. Clean, fine, yellowish sand; the pure, light green water on the shore; with the constant movement of the water - an ideal occasion for a bath. However, the heat and air are somewhat oppressive and I do not feel as comfortable as yesterday.


[5-6]


At night, on the ship [Itapagé] - Tuesday - [February 8th]
It seemed almost an exception to me when our ship weighed anchor and set off promptly at 2:00 p.m. In the morning, I was still in the city. Unfortunately, due to lack of time, I was unable to take a tour of the well-known natural beauties of @(Rio). I was missing a guide. The weather, like yesterday, was overcast. The sky was always covered in clouds. Even when the ship set off, the clouds had not dissipated, but the peaks of the mountains and hills could still be recognized. The image of @(Rio) seemed much more beautiful to me today than yesterday. I believe that the combined action of the mountains and the water has a greater effect the further we head to the @(North) or get closer to it. Heading to @(Rio), we sailed for hours along the coast. Unimaginably long beaches, so long as if they had no beginning or end. Now we sail to @(Vitória), the capital of @(Espírito Santo). I wonder how they are at home? Is &(Tatiana) healthy? And &(Tamara)? Are they still thinking about me? After a long time, today I feel the desire to compose again. May God grant and help me to feel the urge to work again in my heart! In my youth, I had it overflowing. In recent years, I have had to force myself to do every little job.


[6-9]


at night [on the ship Itapagé] - Wednesday - February 9th


About our travel time, to report without delay: after a calm trip, even with contrary wind and sea, we arrived at @(Vitória) at 2:00 p.m. and continued on at 4:00 p.m., that is, only two hours of stopping without touching the pier. Until almost noon, only sea on all sides. Very slowly we approached the coast. At first a very long beach; far behind hills, some mountains and quite prominent elevations. The individual shapes became clearer and clearer, until we could clearly distinguish each of the mountains with such unique shapes. Unexpectedly, a narrow inlet was seen, almost like a river flowing into the sea, and the ship really entered through there. Cliffs and mountains partly bare - only the stone is visible - some small houses, all possible areas planted with sugar cane, trees, larger or smaller islands, behind mountains and, slowly seeing more and more houses, the city of @(Vitória) appeared. I think that God has rarely allowed so many beauties to appear together. Anyone with any feeling for nature would be enchanted by the rocks, which in part resemble Sugar Loaf Mountain, on the @(Rio), with their gentle elevations, covered by forest, and with the small houses appearing in between. Again, unexpectedly, great cliffs appear, and far behind them a chain of blue mountains, first in gentle shapes and then in improbable forms. All around the valley, large and small river branches. I was enchanted. On land, we found a medium-sized city, visibly developing, and as I said, unusually situated close to the water and the rocks. As there was little time, we could only make a quick visit.
Tram ride. Narrow, very old streets with old houses - very romantic - next to new, wide or widening streets with some recent houses. The heat is almost unbearable. For the first time, I saw people drinking coconut water (Kokosmilch) in cafes. This beauty is indescribable. For me it will be unforgettable, and if the opportunity arises in the future, I will come back here again and observe these natural beauties more closely, as well as the interior, which must be especially beautiful. The mountains become increasingly distant, and it is no longer possible to see the coast. The high mountains become less clear. The open sea welcomes us again. So far, the most sublime impression of this recently begun trip.


[9-12]


in @(Bahia) [BA] - Friday night - February 11th
We sailed all day on the open sea, and only occasionally did we see a rocky island or an exceptionally high mountain on the coast in the distance. We were told that we would arrive at @(Bahia) 19 in the evening, but from 6 a.m. we could see land more and more clearly. We approached it quickly. A wonderful bay, wide, round and elongated, like an enormous lake. The coast rising gently from the beach, the palm trees embellishing the landscape. At 9:30 a.m. we reached land. The streets we walked through made a good impression on me, as I was told by an acquaintance. At least it is not as poor as it would be from the description of an acquaintance. Almost all the houses are old and have several floors. The windows, probably due to the heat, are numerous, high and with the lower third almost always decorated with a wrought iron grille. We reached the upper city with the well-known elevator. Trams, cars and people busy going from one side to the other, the ordinary life of the streets. It is not as they had said: blacks are not the majority. On the streets, what you see in other cities in Brazil. In any case, there are many mixed-race people here, most of whom tend to have a skin color that is more white than black. It is possible that there are blocks where only predominantly black people are found. In the few hours we stayed, it was impossible to visit the entire city and surrounding areas. The richness of the decoration of the churches is fantastic. It is said that there are 365 churches in the city and surrounding areas, so that one could visit a different church every day over the course of a year. Many of them are from the 17th and 18th centuries - few from the last century - and it is impressive what can be seen in terms of works of art and wealth. Wonderful paintings, murals and fabric paintings, some of which are well preserved. There are also many that are in urgent need of restoration. All the priests say in a remarkably uniform manner that the State has a moral obligation to help financially with the conservation and restoration of works of art. In many cases this may be correct, but church administrations should also act in this direction and not wait idly. In general, there is a lack of complete knowledge about works of art. I wonder how much of this work must have already been lost. Beautiful pieces of wood can also be seen: tables, chairs, cabinets richly decorated with figures and ornaments. The predominant feature in almost all churches is gold: gilded altars and walls. Wonderful work in gold and silver and numerous figures of saints, some very beautiful, large and small, usually carved in wood. It really does make a good impression when you are there. Beautiful old figures in tiles, often well preserved, stove tiles, usually with a predominance of the color blue, originating from @(Portugal) and @(Holland). In a few months we will be back and then I will have the opportunity to see all this better. Rarely will it be possible to see such a wonderful sight.
over an exceptional dark green bay like the upper city of @(Bahia) over the harbor.


[12-15]
@(Recife) @(Pernambuco) - Monday - February 14th


A few days went by without me having the opportunity to record what we experienced. We left Bahia on Friday at 7:00 p.m. Just by the size of the illuminated area, one can gauge the size of the city. Saturday was like our last days at sea, without any interruptions worthy of note. The influence of the São Francisco River is incredible, flowing into the sea so far from the coast that almost nothing can be seen of it with the naked eye. A line as straight as if drawn with a ruler abruptly separates the fresh water from the sea. For a long stretch, one sails in fresh water. A traveler on board commented that the different waters do not mix due to their high [salt] content. In any case, it is remarkable: the dark blue-green water of the sea and the dirty yellow-brown water of the river. One can get an idea of the length of this gigantic river.
Saturday night, after 7:00 p.m., the ship docked in front of @(Maceió). I could see nothing from land, because the steamer dropped anchor far from the pier. I did not want to go ashore because it seemed too far away, the stay would be short, and the water seemed somewhat rough. The boats in the port produced a fabulous effect. A tall, dark brown sail appearing quickly in the night created a ghostly impression. Late at night, later than announced, around 11:00 p.m., we left the port of @(Maceió), and the next day, that is, on Sunday the 13th, we arrived at @(Recife) at 9:30 a.m. Long before @(Recife), you can see a wonderful beach on the coast. We got closer and closer to land. Coconut trees all along the coast, the city situated right in the lowlands. No hills, no elevations are visible. On land we went straight to the hotel. Some people arrived and welcomed us: &(Waldemar de Oliveira), &(Ascenso Ferreira) and the very lively &(Mário Mello). In the evening, we visited several places where the people dance. It was very hot in the halls full of people. Musically, nothing special or directly related to the people. Late at night, we returned to the hotel. Today I visited &(Ernani Braga) and I still don't know the city. The heat is remarkable. From what I saw, the city is exemplarily clean. There is a good and abundant tram connection to all sides. The streets are well paved with many trees, and over the arm of the sea and the river, there are many beautiful bridges. These waterways make the landscape extremely lively. From the impression I have, we are going to work hard and collect a lot of beautiful music. Everyone knows that they sing, but we haven't heard anything yet. I found the musical advertisements of the colored people with their picturesque and large baskets in which they display their goods to be very rich. A wooden pole on their shoulders, at each end a rope, from which hangs the plate that almost touches the ground: this is how these people walk, singing peacefully through the long and narrow streets of @(Recife). (So far I have only seen men - in @(Salvador), on the contrary, many women).


[15-20]
@(Recife) [PE] - Monday - February 21st


I have been here for over a week now. The days go by so quickly, so full of work that I do not feel the passing of the hours. We have collected many interesting melodies so far, starting with the songs of piano carriers. Following an old custom, which today, in the age of fast transport, is unfortunately no longer practiced and therefore almost forgotten, 8-12 men, depending on the weight of the piano, would carry the instrument from the landing point, usually the port, to the destination. Since in the past few people had the money to buy a piano, and of these few probably only a few had any knowledge of music, a piano was something quite rare, a wonder for everyone. One of these piano carriers told me that they sang in honor of the owner of the instrument, therefore a respected and high-ranking person. Even if this is a reason, I do not believe it is the only one and probably not the most important one. When we see these people carrying a piano, we get the feeling that something is needed to keep everyone in step, something to give time. I was told that in the past they would carry the piano around non-stop for an hour or more. The streets were not paved like they are today, the heat, the fatigue: it was necessary to find something that would keep people together, keeping them cool. The natural means for this is music, group singing. All the songs are not too fast, all in simple binary time (2/4). A soloist begins and renews his part textually, the music is always the same in all the verses, the chorus always responds with the same text and melody. That is how these songs came about, one after the other. We recorded twenty-five toadas on the disc. Some of them are very interesting melodies.
In the evening we visited several popular dance venues without finding anything musically special. We witnessed a rehearsal by the caboclinhos, which was not very musically rich: a harmonica playing a monotonous, very repetitive melody, along with percussion instruments (snare drum, rattle, snare drum) 45. However, the caboclinhos’ dance is very interesting. The boys and men are so agile that you wouldn’t expect to see them on the street. With bows and arrows in their hands, they perform graceful group dances that I would never have expected to see around here. It reminds me of a good theater. They also perform almost acrobatic dances with a thin wooden hoop. With unusual speed, they jump and pass through the narrow hoops. Between dances and spoken scenes, this lasts for hours. A physical effort that only a healthy body can withstand. And more dances in which people almost sit on the floor, with their feet moving quickly back and forth. A wonderful form of group dance. Here a professional dancer could find a real source of stimulation.
The dominant race here is the mestizos, generally dark-skinned and so mixed that it is difficult to tell whether the black, indigenous or white race predominates. A new race is being formed. These mestizos have one thing in common: a joy, an innate natural agility, a persistence in dancing that is almost unbelievable. They have rhythm in their bodies. At any opportunity, whether with their fingers on the table, chair, or with their feet on the floor, they mark a rhythm and sway their bodies in time. A soft melody often accompanies the rhythm. They have a special preference for melodies and quickly learn both the song and the words. But what really predominates is the rhythm. At the @(Santa Isabel theater) we recorded interesting bumba-meu boi tunes. Two female singers, sometimes alternating with a man, sing together in parallel thirds. They are accompanied by a guitar, bass drum (the
The percussionist had no instrument, so he played a snare drum and a ganzá. In the bumba-meu-boi, many animals and characters appear, and each of these characters has a tune. A tune is divided, so to speak, into two parts: the first to call, the arrival, followed by a dance with the second part. We have recorded more than thirty tunes of the bumba meu-boi. Little by little, contact with popular singers became easier.
It breaks our hearts when we leave the city and see the mud huts of these people. Many of them live in shacks, with so little space and almost no money. The poverty they live in is almost inexplicable. And especially the outskirts of @(Recife) are full of these huts. In every direction they are found in unimaginable numbers. They often form large gated neighborhoods: one hut so close to the other that you can barely walk between them. However, these people are used to this, they know no other reality. For them, life was simply made this way by God. They have their joys and their sufferings in their own way!


[20-24]


@(Recife) [PE] - Monday - February 28th
The most interesting musical manifestation that we recorded on record was a xango. When we arrived in Recife, the newspapers were widely reporting on the police measures to ban xango throughout the state of Pernambuco. Xango is a pantheistic cult of worship of gods of African origin, performed in a language of black people that is generally no longer understood, not even by the officiants themselves. Naturally, over time, many absurdities were committed and many deformations appeared. All the objects used were confiscated by the local police. Xango is a religious act, almost continuously sung and danced. A male or female singer begins, and all those present (participants) respond in monodic chorus. The accompanying instruments are only percussion: large drums beaten with the hands, xerê (ganzá) and agogô - a type of elongated bell, without a clapper, struck on the outside with an iron rod. In general, the first singer starts, followed by percussion instruments that provide support with a very interesting and consistent rhythm throughout the song.
We were informed that in a suburb, @(Casa Amarela), a woman would perform a xango for us. After obtaining authorization from the police for this performance, we went to watch a rehearsal. The clothes and objects were missing, as everything was seized and taken away by the police. They only danced and sang, accompanied by percussion instruments. It made a great impression on me! And it would have been even greater if all the necessary objects and clothes had been available. Once again, one fact seemed inexplicable to me: how these people who are not so strong outwardly demonstrate such resistance. For hours, they danced and sang fanatically in very strong heat. This rehearsal was interrupted when suddenly revolvers appeared in the windows and exits of the hall, and a voice shouted: “No one must leave the premises”. Someone in the dear neighborhood had called the police to warn that a xango was taking place there. The employee on duty knew nothing about the authorization and tried to arrest everyone present. Panic took hold of the participants. Soon, however, the confusion was cleared up. After this unpleasant interruption, dancing and singing resumed, although with less enthusiasm, in my opinion. This went on for hours. The next day, we recorded the same songs on records. However, the people were not as harmonious as they had been the night before, during the rehearsal. It was not as fanatical. From the objects confiscated by the police, we were able to choose some freely and free of charge for the &(São Paulo Department of Culture). In this way, and without much work, we managed to get a varied collection of Xango objects, saving a considerable amount of money. It is now Carnival in @(Recife), which is said throughout @(Brazil) to be the happiest and most relaxed of all the cities in the country. At first, I did not notice anything exceptional. Only at night did everything become more lively. It was no longer possible to pass through the main streets. Loudspeakers were installed in many parts of the city, which played the latest Carnival hits non-stop. People danced everywhere; Often, an entire street would be filled with people dancing. Everyone would participate: big and small, poor and rich, men and women. Many people wore simple clothes and beautiful groups of people would pass by in the cars. In my opinion, the most important thing is the people dancing in the streets. You could also see many beautiful zuge (translation: blocks). The caboclinhos, with clothes reminiscent of Indians, are the most beautiful for me. The commotion, the singing, the shouting, the joy of the people knows no bounds. Apart from that, I didn't see any cases of violence. In any case, there were a lot of police on the streets, but everyone was happy and content.


[24-27]
@(Tacaratu) [inland Pernambuco] - [Wednesday] - March 9th


Almost unexpectedly, we left @(Recife) for the interior of @(Pernambuco). At 6:20 a.m. the train left the central station. The immediate surroundings of @(Recife) are wonderfully green and well-planted. Only the living conditions of the poor in the region, mainly blacks, and the many small and half-destroyed huts made a sad impression on me. The green of the landscape lasted for about fifteen minutes of the journey, and then it began to get drier and drier. It was the #sertão region, which suffers so much from the lack of rain. The leaves of the trees wither and fall, the grass and flowers die for lack of water. We travel for hours on end through dry forests. The trees in this region do not grow or are not very tall at this time of year. It is a desolate impression to travel through this region, normally so rich, but now so dry. Further ahead, I could see the only green plantation, large fences of the plant known in São Paulo as Feigen Kaktus. They say that this is the only food for the poor cattle; the thorns are pulled out or cut. They say that when it rains, the region becomes completely green in just eight days.
Almost at the end of this train line, with only three stations left, we stopped at @(Barão do Rio Branco). After a short stay to take care of important matters, we left by truck at 6:00 p.m. for @(Tacaratu), where we arrived the next morning at 4:00 a.m., all tired after a whole night without sleep. However, this night trip was indescribably beautiful. The stars shone in the warm air - only in the early hours of the morning did it get a little cooler. At first, a great road. The trees were dry, the hills became increasingly blurred until it got completely dark - at midnight, half moon. This night was so beautiful, but I regret not being able to see this landscape during the day. @(Tacaratu) is a small village very well situated in the #backlands. It is the domain of the well-known, already popular &(Lampião). Today we were able to record several coconuts emboladas and other songs. Tomorrow will be a great day: we will meet the Indians. So, I finally managed to get to the countryside, to the #backlands - my beautiful dream and great desire came true. I feel happy to be able to see all of this. May God grant that I can get out of my inconsolable mood in @(São Paulo), find more enthusiasm for life and work productively.


[27]


@(Tacaratu) [PE] - Thursday - March 10
Today's visit to the Indians had to be postponed until tomorrow, as the promised truck did not arrive. Early in the morning we went to the cross - a small hill very close by. The view is wonderful. The landscape is undulating and relatively well planted, although there has been no rain this year, as
the people here say. They are extremely kind and simple people. They live somewhat isolated, but there is a radio. There is no proper bathroom in any house; there are no showers, water is very rare. Today we recorded some songs. Tomorrow will be a very important day. We will meet the Indians, or caboclinhos, as they are called by the people here.




[27-29]
@(Tacaratu) [PE] - Friday - March 11
After a difficult journey in a truck, because the road is bad, we arrived after noon in @(Brejo), as the place where the Indians or caboclinhos live is called. Nobody here calls the natives Indians: they are known and called caboclinhos everywhere. The place where they live is a wonderfully situated valley. One gets the impression that the land here is better planted than outside - the caboclinhos have marked out their own space. Many small houses, at a certain distance from each other, so it is not a village in the strict sense. I was disappointed with the caboclinhos. When one expects to find a certain racial characteristic, as I did, one can only be disappointed. The caboclinhos, completely mixed with foreign blood, at least here, are indistinguishable from the people of the village outside. Very rarely do you find any typical features on a face. More so in the eyes: many have these dark eyes that almost always express great withdrawal, sadness and submission. In general, they have even lost their own language. One or two people still know a few words, but they have all been absorbed by the local population. The dark skin color of many of the caboclinhos is noticeable. Each of these caboclinhos has something in common with the others: the habit of begging. As soon as we turn to one side, someone appears to beg. The music and dances still have their own characteristics, but I believe they have also been influenced. One dance is called praiá, danced in old indigenous clothes and accompanied by just one singer: this is still something original. Another dance - called toré - is danced in ordinary clothes by many people. Two instruments, called búzios, were played together and everyone sang a song.
extremely simple melody for two voices. The form - choreographic - is interesting. In my opinion, the melodies of the beach have already disappeared. The songs come from the singer's mouth in a very uncertain way and, it seems to me, very variable. I had the impression that the singer sang whatever came into her head. For me, in any case, it was interesting to get to know this
way of singing. On the way back, I went on horseback.




[30-35]


@(Barão do Rio Branco) [PE] - Wednesday - March 16th
Yesterday we left @(Tacaratu) in a truck and arrived here safely. Along with the caboclinhos (Indians) in @(Brejo dos Padres) I heard two different praiás. The first form: an old woman marks the beat with the maraca in her right hand and begins to sing a simple melody repeated several times. Then the Indians enter in their costumes, each one beating the same beat with the maraca in their right hand and stamping their feet (in a march, in the form of a dance). Every now and then, the dancers in a semicircle approach the singer and bow together before her. Soon, a dancer begins to sing, firmly maintaining the rhythm of the dance. It seemed to me as if he were saying: one, two, one, two, always in the same rhythm. Slowly, another dancer responds to this call: either in a very short staccato or a long sustained one. Thus, in sequence, all the dancers join in the call and form a chord that is impossible to forget for anyone who has heard it. The dance is never interrupted. The melodies played on the harmonica (here, a pife) are in the same simple forms that I heard in @(Recife) with the caboclinhos. From what I could hear, without exception, short motifs that are repeated several times during the dance. The same thing happens with another similar motif. The musical motif always has two pulses.
  

Various rhythmic movements are formed based on this scheme, some of which I would like to show:
  



and many more similar ones. The flutist repeats these phrases in simple binary (2/4) up to 20-30 times or more, until he moves on to the next phrase, which is repeated in the same way.
The second wind instrument, if we can call it that, is made from the tail of an armadillo and only produces a few natural notes. It is blown into one end, which is closed but has a small hole. The fingers are inserted into the other end, which is open, to achieve the different tones. The rhythm is always the same:
(...)
The dancers' maracas always beat the same beat
(...)
so that the two winds and the maracas produce the following rhythm:
(...)
Only the gaita differs from the form described. The greatest merit of the praiá is the dance with its constant forms and the tapping of the dancers' feet marking the rhythm of the music. You can clearly hear them tapping their bare feet on the sandy ground, in sync:
(...)
In addition, we have the song already described, if we can use the word song here. I have tried to capture these cries and sounds that constitute the strange harmony in these two praiás. In this last form of praiá, the bagpipe begins alone, then the armadillo enters, and later, the dancers' maracas. The end of the dance is in reverse order: the maracas stop, then the armadillo, and after a few steps, with a long sustained note, the bagpipe.
The dance venue was very beautiful, situated in a beautiful valley in the @(Brejo dos Padres): a circular sandy area next to a large, leafy tree - large, leafy trees are a rarity here. At the foot of this tree, in the shade, the singer sits together with the musicians, so that when the dancers bow down in front of the singer or the musicians, they also come closer to the tree. In the praiá, only men dance. Sometimes, a woman would put her arm in the end of the human chain and dance along. In the toré, on the other hand, only couples dance: always men and women with their arms linked, dancing in a circle or in various positions. Everyone sings together a simple, quite repetitive melody. The men sing the same melody an 8th lower. The singing is accompanied by two shells 72: hollow wooden sticks, about a meter long and 10-12 centimeters in diameter. Inside one end there is a wooden stick that is shorter than the conch shell, so that nothing can be seen from the outside. This instrument can produce two sounds: by blowing hard, a higher and higher-pitched sound; by blowing less hard, a lower and lower sound in a third. It takes a lot of breath to play it, and so the musicians constantly take turns:
(...)
First, the shells begin to play, then the singing begins; the ending is reversed again. Maracás are not used here. The dancers' clothing was their everyday clothes. The words were partly indigenous and partly Portuguese. The praiá made a deeper impression on me than the toré.


[35-40]
@(João Pessoa) [PB] - Thursday - March 24th
We left yesterday at 5am by train from the central station in @(Recife) to @(João Pessoa), the capital of Parahyba - or @(Paraíba) as it is commonly written here - and arrived in good condition at 12:20pm. The route is 215-20 kilometers: the train therefore developed an average speed of thirty kilometers per hour. In @(João Pessoa), we stayed at the @(Parahyba-Hotel). They say it is the best in the city and I actually feel good here. However, it is not as comfortable and modern as the Hotel Central in @(Recife). The trip to @(João Pessoa) went without any major problems. I have already described the surroundings of @(Recife): the poor people build their mud huts, the mucambos, in completely impossible places. When the tide is high, it is often necessary to cross narrow bridges, or planks and logs, that cross arms of the sea and deeper waters to reach the cabins.
It is common that at high tide one has to walk through shallow water to get there, and that some huts are washed away by the water at high tide. First, these extremely primitive living conditions, and then, the equally poor way of life of so many people. In Recife alone there must be about fifty thousand mucambos81 - and in each one at least five people live. With this example one can get a small idea of the poverty of this pitiful multitude of people. There is still much to be done here.
The surroundings of Recife seemed much cooler this time. It has also rained a few times and the trees have turned green; the bushes already have their leaves and the grass, plants and trees are reaching up. During the dry season, this place will be as desolate, as dead as the #backlands of @(Pernambuco) where we were. The train runs for hours, the entire route is surrounded by sugarcane plantations. After the first rains, the young plants stretch out, dressed in fresh green. Sugarcane is the most important product here. People live off sugar. When it rains, everyone is fine, but when it doesn't rain or there is not enough rain, the landscape withers away along with the people and animals. The region is undulating all along the way - you don't see any hills here. Sometimes, you see a hill in the distance that stands out from the rest. Just like in the #backlands, here you don't see any tall forests, but usually low scrublands or forests that are only two years old. The land is well cultivated. You rarely see unplanted land. Trees grow next to the cabins. There are many mango trees planted, with their fruits that are so pleasant to see. I don't know why I haven't eaten a single mango here yet.
Near @(João Pessoa) I saw a kind of meadow full of bright yellow flowers. This reminded me of my homeland which now belongs to @(Germany). How quickly this Anchlüss came. How long there was talk of war, and how everything was apparently calm. How will the
people in @(Salzburg) in this new situation? What will &(Paumgartner) do? Will I ever see my homeland again? I insisted on the idea of creating a new homeland for myself here in @(Brazil) and I feel satisfied. May God give me strength and endurance so that I can still work hard, and after my return to @(São Paulo), may I have the opportunity to pass on the knowledge acquired on this trip. The white spots on my hands and face are becoming larger and more numerous. This skin disease has been haunting me for years without me being able to find out what it is. In @(Recife), a man told me that he suffered from the same disease and that he cured himself completely by rubbing kerosene on the spots daily. Since the 20th of this month I have been doing the same, and this time I have decided to try it for at least a month. I would feel like a new person if I could recover from this attack, or whatever these skin spots are. This trip is doing me a lot of good, it brings so many new sensations that I will arrive in @(São Paulo) as a new man. As for music, in the last few days in @(Recife) I transcribed many Xango melodies. For me, this was also the most interesting thing there was there. I feel relieved since I left @(Recife). I found popular music, at least in the city and surrounding areas, to be strongly influenced by the radio. And many singers brought songs so uncertain that often in the end it was impossible to know which version to choose. We haven't started working here yet, but it seems to me that we have a lot to do. &(Ademar Vidal) helps as much as he can, he is knowledgeable about everything and a great advisor. I am impatient: the last news I received from &(Tatiana) was on the 27th of last month. The time needed for the birth of the child has already passed! Could it be that &(Tatiana) is already a mother??


[41-47]
@(Pedreiras Farm) (near: @(Ox Head)
@(Campina Grande) [PB] - [Monday] - April 4th
The people in @(João Pessoa) were extremely attentive: they helped us whenever possible, and if we expressed a wish, they made it happen. In @(João Pessoa), after much preparation, we were only able to record one cabocolinho - which had no song, just a few spoken words, the rhythm of the percussion instruments (two zabumbas, two ganzás) and the melodic theme of the harmonica. The cabocolinhos paint themselves completely black with a feather ornament on their heads (here, many peacock feathers) and call themselves Índios-Africanos. According to the information obtained, this group has existed for ten years and participates in the carnival every year. More interesting was the recording of twenty-five cocos on @(Tambau beach), a place about fifteen minutes by car from @(João Pessoa). Unfortunately the weather was rainy, but even so, the people danced and sang with an innate natural joy. All the cocos are sung. A soloist begins with a melody with changing verses, and the choir responds with the same words and the same melody. Thus, the coco is sung and danced for half an hour or more. The soloist - sometimes also the female soloist - changes the verses and stanzas to his melody, and the choir always responds following the same music and lyrics. The accompaniment is provided only by percussion instruments, in this case a zabumba and a ganzá. No melodic instruments should be used in the coco. The soloist is usually close to the instruments - he does not dance, only doing so rarely. People often beat the time with their hands or feet. According to the information obtained, there are two types of coco: the coco de roda - in which everyone dances in a circle, with the instruments and the soloist in the middle - and the coco [de parelha]: people form a circle, beat the time with their hands, and one or more couples dance a type of solo dance in the middle of the circle. Musically there is no difference - a melody can be danced in either way. There is a variety, the coco embolada, which is musically different, but with the same base, soloist and chorus. I found it interesting how people gradually participated, remembered old cocos and, it seemed, could sing and dance for days and nights, with a natural freshness and always new melodies. In @(João Pessoa) I met a woman who will present us with more than forty songs. Unfortunately, she showed up halfway through our trip, so I will only be able to write down these popular songs after returning from the interior.
On Friday we began our trip through the interior of Paraíba. In the late afternoon we took a truck to Campina Grande. The region after João Pessoa will be unforgettable for me. All around, there were only sugarcane plantations, about a meter high at this time of year; in the distance, constant lightning, stormy lights all the time. The sun had long gone - everything was dark, the stars were shining. The countless fireflies were unforgettable: the plantations seemed to glow in the darkness of the night. Due to a car problem, we had to spend the night before Campina Grande, in Ingá. The next day, on Saturday, very early, we went through a region with intense plantations, like here, and arrived after 7 am in Campina Grande, the second largest city in the state and one of the largest cotton markets in the world. It was actually market day. The main streets of the city, clean and of medium size, are densely lined on the left and right with market stalls. They probably offered for sale everything that was necessary for people's lives. It is said that this is the largest market in the entire North. The trade, buying and selling, goes on until the evening. Musically, I did not find anything of value. I saw two pastoris: the actors - a singer acting as presenter and 6-8 girls in short skirts, transparent dresses, among them some children - dancing on a small and simple wooden stage about 1.5 meters high, more walking-dancing than dancing, singing songs that are almost all hits of the city. A poor impression. The man, the singer, who is also the director of the group, looks for someone in the audience who seems more favorable and asks how much they offer for this dance or song - he then gives 1-2 mil-réis. On Sunday we went to a farm near @(Campina Grande), the @(Pedreiras farm), where there are large stones with inscriptions and drawings that must be a thousand years old or more. They were probably made by the Indians. I took three photographs. The tall rocks, rising up to ten meters or more from the ground, always show, towards the same side - the west - their drawings, which for the most part are so faded by the action of the weather that they are barely visible.
recognize the lines. Often you can still recognize red paint. I am skeptical about the age of these drawings, because I saw how the stones peel and I cannot believe that in these conditions the drawings could last so long. The region here is very reminiscent of the #backlands of @(Pernambuco): you can also see very low forest here. On every side, only bushes, lots of cacti, lots of earth. There is a lack of rain. It can go up to eight months without rain. In addition, you see an abnormal amount of stones on the ground. Many bushes have not yet sprouted. They are bare, without leaves. The aridity is so strong that the cattle die of thirst and hunger. Here we found a guitar player and a weak singer, we are going to record some songs. At noon, we will continue our journey to @(Patos). Now I am isolated from the world again. No news from home, no newspaper. When I get to @(João Pessoa) I hope there will be news from home. &(Tatiana) certainly had difficult times, almost a month waiting, day after day. May God grant that everything turned out well.


[47]
@(Patos) @(Paraíba) - [Monday] - 4th [sic] of April
In the morning, at @(Pedreiras farm), we recorded more than ten viola solos by &(guitarist José da Luz). Unfortunately, the expected singer did not show up. I got to know three new dances. Since &(José) did not sing, I could only record the melody played by the viola. They are: baião or baiano, farinha and octave. According to &(José), these three dances, which are new to me, are performed in a circle and sung with instrumental accompaniment, as available. The singers beat the time with their hands and feet. According to him, we can find many of these three dances in the countryside!?! [sic]. At noon, we left the farm, passing through the dry landscape already described, but
Here it seems even more desperate than in Pernambuco. How people can live here is a mystery to me. We slowly move from flat terrain to hilly terrain, until slowly chains of higher, rocky hills appear. An exceptionally beautiful and varied landscape, especially for me. It has already rained here and the landscape seems greener than before.


[48-49]


@(Patos) [PB] - [Tuesday] - April 5th
Today we were at a farm belonging to the mayor of the city, about two hours by car from here, and witnessed a vaquejada (bull hunt). The cowboys dress completely in leather to protect themselves from the thorns of the bushes and trees of the #backlands. They hunt on horseback, two riders chase the bull, keeping it between them and getting close until one of the cowboys gets close enough to grab the animal's tail. The tail is wrapped around the end of the hand and then the cowboy pulls with all his strength to the side until the bull throws itself to the ground in pain. Then the second rider quickly jumps off the horse and ties the animal's back legs - the bull is safe and can be led wherever he wants. This custom is about to disappear since by law all properties have to be fenced. In the past, it wasn't like that and the animals mixed together. Every year, neighboring farmers would gather and separate their cattle, which could be recognized by the brands engraved with iron, and take them home.


[49-50]
@(Patos) [PB] - [Friday] - April 8th
In terms of music, we recorded many cocos on CDs. From what I could tell, unfortunately few of them have beautiful and varied melodies. In general, the important thing is the words, the verses. In this aspect, the singers have an unexpected ability. They improvise for hours and never tire of creating new verses for the same melody. The melodic line is simple, as is the response of the choir - often even in the same tone - so that a coco of this type is very tiring musically. Here all the cocos were accompanied by the ganzá, which keeps time and always beats the same rhythm. Any of the singers sings and at the same time beats the ganzá. Sometimes, a singer even finds it difficult to sing without playing the ganzá along with it. There are variations in the form of the verses - they call a stanza of ten verses an embolada. A partada with four verses. There is also the practice of challenging each other, in which one singer calls another to a word contest. Some toadas (songs with guitar), children's songs and some bumba-meu-boi toadas complete the rest of the recordings. The last ones were poorly sung: people didn't remember the order of the characters, and each one of those present wanted to know better than the others. The melody was uncertain, the words uncertain. The main singer was ill, the others had almost no voice and showed little knowledge of the toadas. They sang in unison - a melody, two fifes, a bass drum, a snare drum played at the same time. However, something very different from the singing: a real confusion. The most important thing for the people seemed to be the fun. Today we will continue our trip to @(Pombal), a smaller city than @(Patos) - according to what they say. Here in @(Patos) there must be about two thousand houses.


[50-52]
@(Pombal) [PB] - [Sunday] - April 10th


I believe it was the first time on our trip that we filmed on the first day. This is a sign that we are learning and making progress. I believe that in the future we will be able to solve a city like @(Pombal) or @(Patos) in two or three days at most. The farewell in @(Patos) was very cordial, the people were visibly sad to see us go. The mayor came to wish us a good trip. The region we are passing through, as everywhere else, is #sertão: everything is arid, generally undulating, with blocks and walls of bare stone. Now it has rained, the dry region is not so recognizable because the bushes have sprouted again, the previously bare surfaces have turned green, grass and weeds are sprouting and you can see many puddles of water on the side of the road. More or less halfway between @(Patos) and @(Pombal) we passed the largest reservoir in @(Paraíba), called @(Condado). An attempt is being made to collect water in suitable places, so that it does not disappear even in the dry season. Condado is already a small lake and canals are being built around it, which should provide the soil with water during the dry season. It is expected that in a few years, life will be restored to the vast unused areas that are rarely productive. It seems that great progress has already been made. In @(Pombal) we were warmly welcomed by the mayor and other local leaders who offered us all the help that is possible here in the #backlands. Yesterday two blind brothers sang for us accompanied by accordion and mandolin. For me it was something new, because they sang a lot in two voices (in thirds) and mainly sambas. Then an old blind man sang with a young man. I also recorded some coconuts. For the first day it was a good collection. Today is Palm Sunday. In @(Austria), the decision on the Anchlüss to the Reich is now taking place. I have not read the newspapers for many days. How is everything at home? What are &(Tânia) and &(Tamara) doing? Has the child been born yet? A boy or a girl? It may be weeks before I return to @(João Pessoa) and can find letters from home.




[53-55]
@(Sousa) [PB] - [Saturday] - April 16th
In Pombal we recorded many coconuts and songs. The mayor was especially attentive and helped as much as he could. The much-talked-about Reis de Congo was a disappointment to me. We were able to record two melodies, without originality. The Christian influence is unmistakable. On the other hand, the selection of coconuts was good. The trip from @(Pombal) to @(Sousa) was made on a good road and without incidents. More or less halfway, we visited a large farm - @(Acauã) - which has one of the oldest chapels in the country. Here we saw a large number of palm trees - carnauba - which seem to be found in large quantities especially in @(Rio Grande do Norte). The leaves of this palm tree are squeezed and this juice provides a highly sought-after wax. We also saw many oiticicas, a tree that a few years ago was purposely uprooted because it was believed that the shade of this evergreen tree harmed the cotton plantations. Nowadays this tree is precious, oil is extracted from its fruits, factories have appeared and provide employment. In @(Sousa) we find little movement, probably due to the
Holy Week. The population is very Catholic. A young man sang a large number of “pieces” - as he called them - from the Reisado. It seemed to me that the young man was improvising. One time he sang and spoke like this, the next something completely different. The melody was changed at will. When we asked, he always gave some excuse. We were told that in @(Serra do Comissário) there lived a number of blacks who still sang and danced according to old traditions. After two hours of driving and almost four hours of horseback riding, we arrived tired at the top. A beautiful view. An old chapel and some mud huts. The blacks had disappeared and with them the sought-after songs and dances. The blacks had long since mixed with the local population. An old black woman we met was from another place. Some of the songs she sang after much insistence were not interesting. After a short stay, we started back. I had no experience with horseback riding yet, and I arrived really tired and late at night in @(Sousa). Probably because I was so tired, I couldn't sleep well. For the first time on this trip, my stomach didn't work properly. It's surprising that there are no plagues or diseases here. I've never seen so many flies on the table, in the bed, everywhere else, like here. The population lives in extreme poverty, everything is reduced to a minimum, and the food is unimaginable. The heat here, like in @(Pombal), is very strong.




[55-56]
@(Cajazeiras) [PB] - Easter Sunday - April 17th
Yesterday afternoon we left @(Sousa), after recording some not very expressive pieces. I left @(Sousa) with great pleasure, because I didn't feel comfortable in this small village. The service wasn't the best. The people tried hard, but in these conditions there was really no way to do better. On the road, nothing special. It had rained the last few days. In the evening, we arrived here in @(Cajazeiras), the largest city in the #backlands after @(Campina Grande). We found a good hotel here, the @(Hotel Oriente). It was great to find a clean bathroom, bedroom and kitchen. Today the mayor came to visit us, and he put his services at our disposal. After lunch, we went to a dam - @(Piranhas) - about an hour's drive away. An impressive work. The largest dam I've seen around here so far. People were notified of our arrival and tonight they'll throw a party in our honor. The musical part is already prepared, but nothing can be said in advance. Today the mail arrived, I was expecting a letter from &(Tânia) sent from @(João Pessoa), but there was nothing for me.


[57-59]
@(Curema) @(Paraíba) - [Wednesday] - April 20th
Yesterday we left @(Cajazeiras). We found almost nothing to record and there was no prospect of improvement. We recorded a good cabaçal and a guitarist gave us several samples of his inventive capacity. It seemed to me that at the time of the recording he was not particularly happy: he did not sing the mourão, the octave and the martelos as he himself had previously said they should be. In @(Cajazeiras), the recording was poor. After a trip of about an hour on a truck we passed the @(Gonçalo dam). It is admirable what the Government has done in recent years in this regard, building in the dry region of the North. The road from @(Cajazeiras) to @(Curema) is good. Only a 1-2 kilometer stretch is bad. In @(Curema) we found a lot of traffic. The largest dam in the entire North is being built here. A village was built for the engineers and occasional visitors. One of these houses was made available to us for our short stay. I felt almost at home. After a long time, a clean little house with clean rooms, beds, hammocks, floors, water and bathrooms. In short, everything we are used to in @(São Paulo) and that we can't help but miss in the #backlands. I would really like to stay here for a few days to enjoy this nice little house. I feel reborn, and this is a result of settling in, since I miss the domestic routine I have in @(São Paulo). So far, no recordings, but there must be some singers around here. Life revolves around the construction of the dam. As I saw today, they are really working and building a project that would make any country proud. Trucks and machines are working non-stop and a large part is already ready. However, it will take another ten years to finish. Then, the state of @(Paraíba) will have water and new and fertile plantations will appear, which will be a blessing for this entire land. The people here will be reborn and will be able to achieve unimaginable progress.




[59-60]
@(Sousa) [PB] - [Saturday] - April 23
Yesterday we left @(Curema) very early. I was sorry to have to leave the beautiful little house. The trip was bearable: the roads were bad in some parts, but in general they were in good condition for traffic. In @(Curema) we recorded more than twenty melodies of a reisado. Also cocos and questionable songs on the guitar. In @(Sousa), we recorded a reisado or bumba-meu-boi - not good - and a barca or nau catarineta. A man sang all the melodies alone, some of them old well-known from &(Mário)'s collection in @(São Paulo), and more than eleven toadas of reis do congo. An older black man sang the master - the solos - and accompanied himself with the guitar, a young man played the cavaquinho and 8-9 boys made up the crew - the sailors - and sang the response in unison. Here I found the letter from @(João Pessoa) that should have been sent
to @(São Paulo). It was not from &(Tatiana) but from &(Bosch) in @(Recife) and contained messages from &(Höller) and &(Varatassi). I was happy to find the letter I had thought was lost. Yesterday I sent a telegram to &(Tatiana) with reply paid to @(Campina Grande). I hope you can soon find out how &(Tânia) is doing and how everything is at home. We will leave here today and, if it is possible due to the roads, we will go straight to @(Campina Grande). Everyone is as friendly as the people in the interior of @(Paraíba) have always been, but I am happy to be leaving here. I have never made any special demands regarding food or living conditions, but when for weeks on end we lack the most important things, we remember our usual life, a clean room, a bath, a bed, all these good things. The people here know nothing beyond their immediate surroundings and are content with that.


[61-65]
@(João Pessoa) [PB] - [Thursday] - April 28th
After a tiring twenty-five-day journey, we arrived here late on Monday night. The hotel was full, so we had to look for another place to sleep. Our worthy traveling companion and driver (João Gomes de Brito) took us to a guesthouse he knew. It was questionable, because in the darkness we could not check the cleanliness of the hammocks that had been brought to us. It seemed to me that they gave off a dirty smell, but when one is as tired as I was one does not give much importance to this. I was not clean either, for traveling in an open vehicle on dusty country roads I was covered in dust. I especially feel the difficulty with bathing. In many hotels the bathing facilities were such that we preferred to do without it. So I lay down with my dirty clothes on, without bathing, on the hammock, without taking or unpacking the luggage from the truck. For only a few hours it seemed unnecessary to me. I was also indifferent due to fatigue. Tired as I was, my colleagues and I couldn't sleep this time. The place was full of mosquitoes, which, in addition to the annoying noise, also wanted to suck our blood. These insects tried hard to make themselves known until dawn - this time we didn't manage to get the much-needed rest. The next morning we moved to the hotel and, finally, a room was provided for us. I was finally able to take a shower and today I feel well and rested. Thank God, I received good news from home. From @(Sousa) I sent a telegram to &(Tatiana) with a paid reply to @(Campina Grande). On Sunday, when I went to the telegraph office and asked for the telegram, the clerk replied that the postman had taken it to look for me in the hotels in the city. There was no address indicated on the telegram. In @(Sousa), the clerk had assured me that telegrams without an address remained at the post office, which was exactly what I wanted on this trip so full of unexpected events. I did everything possible to get hold of the long-awaited telegram. I couldn't. Before our departure I asked for the same
was sent to @(Alagoa Nova), which was also promised to me. Unfortunately, I didn't have the opportunity to look for it there. In the next city, @(Alagoa Grande), the telegraph office was just closing when I arrived. So I had to wait until the next day, when we passed through @(Alagoa Nova) again, and finally I received the telegram. Thank God everything went well. On the 25th I finally received the happy news that &(Tânia) is fine and has brought a girl into the world. I was and am happy. In @(João Pessoa) I found a number of telegrams and letters from home at the hotel, which completely reassured me. In @(Sousa) we were still able to do some good work: congo kings and reisado or bumba-meu-boi. Leaving there was a certain relief for me, even with the people being as helpful as they were, I didn't feel at ease. Maybe the climate! Before @(Pombal) we were held up for hours by the @(Piranhas) river, which had overflowed due to the rain, and our truck entered the boat that was supposed to take us to the other side the wrong way. It took a while to get the car into the correct position, and it was already completely dark when we continued on our way. In @(Pombal) we met up with our old friends, and after a short stay, we continued on to @(Patos), where we arrived shortly before midnight. We had a few hours of restful sleep, and shortly after 4 a.m. the trip continued to @(Campina Grande). From there we visited nearby cities to prepare our work in advance. The difference between the landscape of the #sertão and the one here is remarkable. The place is called @(Brejo), and brejo is the place where there is enough water. You almost always see well-cultivated land, and everything seems to grow well. It was a joy, after the arid #backlands, to find here thick clumps of banana trees, tall sugarcane and everything green - it's a shame there are no more real forests. From @(Campina Grande) we went to @(Alagoa Nova), from there to @(Alagoa Grande), where we spent the night, and the next day we arrived at @(Areia), a nice town situated on top of a hill, in a beautiful and varied undulating landscape. From there again through @(Alagoa Nova) and back to @(Campina Grande). After a few hours of staying we went through @(Itabaiana) - the town of our driver who wanted us to spend the night at his house at all costs, since his wife had just given birth to a healthy baby girl a few days ago - back to @(João Pessoa). We will stay here until the end of the week, then we will visit the
@(Brejo) - and God willing, we will go to @(Rio Grande do Norte).




[66-67]
@(Itabaiana) [PB] - [Wednesday] - May 4th
Today my little daughter is three weeks old and I still don't know her name, how much she weighs, how she's doing... These are the conditions of the mail here. I hope everything is fine at home. In @(João Pessoa) I rested completely from the tiring trip through the #backlands of @(Paraíba). I started to compose based on an idea I had. A symphonic poem divided into three parts: first, @(Praiá) @(Tacaratu), @(Brejo dos Padres), with a melancholic melody (request of the blind), then a second part with melodies of xango, and at the end, carnival in @(Recife). I also made a general organization of the recorded pieces. Finally, on Monday, our second trip through the interior began. After a few interruptions to visit churches and houses, we arrived at night in @(Itabaiana), one of the most advanced cities in the interior of @(Paraíba). The mayor received us with the greatest attention and placed one of his employees at our complete disposal. So we were able to record twenty-five coconuts yesterday, a number of shouts and requests for alms. Yesterday was market day here. I noticed that the market here is not far behind the one in @(Campina Grande). I should also point out how the landscape between @(João Pessoa) and here
was wonderfully green and varied after the rains: large, tall, beautiful sugarcane plantations and cornfields. A paradise. No aridity at all.


[67-68]
@(Alagoa Nova) [PB] - [Saturday] - May 7th
In @(Itabaiana), after much effort, an uncomfortable truck trip and a stretch on foot in rainy weather, we managed to find an old man who could sing about thirty lines of the catimbó. Since catimbó is as forbidden and persecuted by the police here as xangô is in @(Recife), these people are naturally very fearful. After much argument, the catimbozeiro agreed to go to @(Itabaiana) the next day and sing the verses for us. He was ill and trembling from old age or weakness. In any case, he did not sing very well, with a weak voice and, as it seemed to me, changing the beat and melody after sudden breaths. He could barely sing a few words without taking a breath. His wife sang in unison with him. She had a better voice than her husband, but it was not as authentic. The verses are not exceptional, but they are good. There were still a lot of coconuts, aboiar and requests from the beggars. The stay was longer than expected. The continuation of the trip through @(Ingá), @(Campina Grande) to @(Alagoa Nova) passed without notable incidents. Here in @(Alagoa Nova) we lost a day with a catimbozeiro. He was afraid and claimed not to remember any songs anymore. The uncomfortable trip to him was wasted. Here we have recorded so far a few and weak lines of reis - or catimbó. However, in my opinion it has nothing to do with catimbó. The melodies seem like a polished church song in the countryside. To this day we have not been very happy with the trip to @(Brejo). May God grant that here, as in the following cities, we find many good songs.


[69]
@(Rio Tinto) [PB] - [Tuesday] - May 10th
After @(Alagoa Nova) we went to @(Areia), by a shortcut through beautiful, undulating and fertile landscapes. A narrow road up and down - our driver had a lot of work. On a farm I found the first orchids. From what I could see, most of the forests of @(Paraíba State) are still around @(Areia). It gets quite cold at night in the upper town of @(Areia). We found maruja - as the catarineta ship is called here - very pretty aboios, some blind men begging for money and a few coconuts. From @(Areia) to @(Alagoa Grande) it was a beautiful trip, especially the beautiful view from the hill in the long valley to @(Alagoa Grande). Unfortunately we didn't find anything favorable, so we continued the trip here, @(Rio Tinto). @(Mamanguape) like @(Rio Tinto) are large and very nice towns; the first is old, the second is new. Here we have again a beautiful entire house at our disposal. Tomorrow we will go to @(Baía da Traição). I hope the harvest will be rich.


[70-72]
@(João Pessoa) [PB] - [Sunday] - May 15th
The trip to @(Baía da Traição) and to the Indians of @(São Francisco) was a disappointment in terms of music, but in terms of scenery it was very good. Worth mentioning is the large number of enormous coconut trees on the wonderful beach of @(Baía da Traição). In @(São Francisco), we found characteristic Indians with their typical eyes: they are somewhat smaller people than those of @(Brejo dos Padres) in @(Pernambuco) and, in general, much friendlier. The small houses made of coconut leaves are also charming. You can see some very well-crafted ones both here and in @(Baía da Traição) and a little in @(Brejo). The Indians danced and sang the toré, but in a way that seemed quite decadent to me, preserving nothing of the old traditions. The people wore their everyday clothes, the dance in a circle without interest. The coconut is generally better danced. The melody has no characteristics of its own, the whole tradition has been lost. The gourd also brought nothing new. Without gaining anything, we lost an entire day and returned to the beautiful @(Baía da Traição), where we were somewhat rewarded in the
The next day, when we were able to record about fifty coconuts, some of them very beautiful and characteristic. In @(Rio Tinto) - a new city that owes its size and its entire life to the creation of several factories of &(Casas Pernambucanas) - we were promised a lot, but nothing came of it, so we left without making a single recording. It is interesting how external conditions can make a city grow quickly. @(Rio Tinto) had until a few days or years ago a few huts, and today, with the construction of the factories, it is already a small city with wide and well-placed streets, marching towards progress with giant steps. In contrast, @(Mamanguape), about half an hour away from @(Rio Tinto), one of the oldest cities in @(Paraíba), is continually losing inhabitants and many old and abandoned houses can be seen. During the trip back to @(João Pessoa) I could see throughout the region the hard-working farmers carefully cultivating every available piece of land, at this time of year covered in fresh greenery. Here you can see a lot of sugar cane, corn, beans, cotton and cassava. After @(Sapé), there was a heavy rain, almost a storm. This time, I was in the front with the driver, but I still got completely wet. My colleagues also got wet. I usually prefer to travel in the truck, where I have more freedom of movement and a better view. At dusk, we arrived in good condition at @(João Pessoa), where, in a nice hotel, we immediately arranged for a complete cleaning. There were no letters from home since a few days earlier the mayor of @(Rio Tinto) had picked up the mail in @(João Pessoa) and delivered our letters.




[72-75]
@(João Pessoa) [PB] - [Friday] - May 20th
Following orders from @(São Paulo), we must continue our journey from here straight to @(Pará). We will probably leave next week on a ship from Cabedelo. I received good news from home: I finally know that the little one is called &(Renata). I also received a lovely photograph. &(Tamara) has grown and is stronger. Here the days pass almost monotonously, so much so that we have become accustomed to traveling. Now my thoughts naturally turn to the continuation of this journey. Yesterday we were invited by &(Pedro Batista) for lunch and were warmly welcomed. Also yesterday, we were able to record some interesting and very beautiful melodies in @(Torrelândia), a suburb of the city. The singer said it was xangô, but the plot and the music had no similarity to the xangôs I have heard so far, but rather to catimbós. I think the man was suspicious, since the police are rigorously pursuing all these manifestations. The action took place in the courtyard of a small house, a shack. A table in the center, decorated with flowers and all the objects appropriate for the performance. The queen sits on a chair and does not move from there. All the others, twelve people in all, dance around the table in a dance that has nothing to do with the Xango. The movements are softer, in my opinion not as fanatical, they are more submissive and resigned. The master begins to sing almost all the verses alone and the others respond in unison. The master was ill at the time, so his voice was often supported by a disciple or the queen. There were two lines for the “opening of the table”, then more than twenty melodies by the various masters, who were absent and so were sung by the master of the table. These are the “lines of the table”, and for the closing there is also a line, as the melodies are called here. I liked the latter especially, because they had real melodies and were not dominated by rhythm as in the Xango. Maracas are used to accompany the singing, and each participant has his or her own instrument. In several lines, instead of the maraca, a bow and arrow are used, which, like the maraca, are struck along with the musical pulse. In some dances, the maraca and arrow are left aside to smoke a pipe. The dances are performed in a circle, standing or kneeling. Twice the master made a spirit descend upon a disciple, who fell asleep on the floor. The melodies reminded me of the old diatonic modes of church, and I think they are the most beautiful that we have recorded to date.




[75-78]
@(João Pessoa) [PB] - [Thursday] - May 26th
In @(Recife) - therefore more than two months ago - I had a brown denim suit made for my trips to the interior. Now, finally, I have received this long-awaited suit. I hope it will serve you well. Finally, it seems that our trip to the @(North) will begin next week. We are not going straight to @(Pará), but first to @(Maranhão). From home I receive the news that &(Tânia) wants to earn more money from her students than she has been receiving. I hope she gives up on the aforementioned plan and looks for another way. I cannot shake off a feeling of guilt for this state of agitation, because in
My last letters I have been writing about saving, about leaving
money in the bank, and even about buying a house. Of course &(Tânia) was
influenced by this type of thinking, because now she wants, in any case
possible way, earn more money.
The continuation of our trip is already so delayed that it is starting to get monotonous. Apparently we are going straight to &(Maranhão), and not to &(Pará) as initially planned. In the last few days here we recorded the nau catarineta, with about forty different melodies. The songs are not
were recorded in the correct order, because in the feeding scene - part of the meal - &(Saia) intended to be filmed together with the recording of the album. Unfortunately, the scene was recorded two days later - again without simultaneous filming. It was very hot, the people who were singing soon got tired. The natural time for eating had already passed. Soon, the sailors wanted to finish and it seemed to me that in the end, the songs were sung and recorded out of their usual order. As in many popular songs, here too a soloist, usually the first master, supported by a second singer, begins to sing. The choir - sailors - responds in unison. The accompaniment is provided only by plucked string instruments: two guitars, a cavaquinho and two banjos - five instruments in all. There are no percussion instruments. I got the impression that the instruments partly altered the rhythm of the melody and often changed the character of the music. The five instrumentalists always played together and at the end they were called to accompany the catarineta ship. The master had a police whistle and always blew it loudly twice before the beginning of each song. This was a signal to call attention and to gather the singers together. The whistle was always the same: On the first beat of the second measure, all the sailors gave a collective shout, like a short blow: “É”. Then, after a pause of a quarter note, the soloist began to sing. Practically every part, every phrase was repeated. Before the choir entered, the whistle was blown again, this time just once. This was repeated before the beginning of each song by the choir. During the song, there was no call for “É” by the sailors. At the end, as at the beginning: as soon as the last sound was finished - and often together with the last sound - the whistle was called: and again the loud “É” by the sailors. Almost all the songs had many stanzas. We only recorded 2-3 verses of each melody. The rest will be noted by &(Exit). The songs were mostly well sung. Naturally, there is always a slight confusion in the rhythm, which, like a small mess, should not be considered a mistake. During all the songs, people dance or make some movement of the feet or body, so that there is always movement in the scene. The ship is in the center, in the background of the stage. Here, the number of participants was 20-25 people.




[79]
@(João Pessoa) [PB] - [Monday] - May 30th
The day has finally come when we will leave here - or has it not? At first, we would leave early in the morning; then after lunch, at 4:00 p.m., 5:00 p.m.; then right after dinner. Now it is almost 9:00 p.m. and we are still here. The last few days have been monotonous, because due to the daily wait for the long-planned departure we were unable to start anything properly. I hope that in @(São Luís) it will be better and the trip there through the #backlands of @(Paraíba), @(Ceará) and @(Piauí) will go without any unforeseen events. I am happy about this trip, which for me is so interesting, even though it is very tiring. I will travel through regions that are not easily known. The transition from the dry region to the perennially fertile land will be remarkable. After the catarineta ship, nothing more was recorded. Here in @(João Pessoa) a lot of time was wasted: during the many days that we stayed, little was recorded.


[80-94]


@(Help) @(Piauí) - [Monday] - June 6th
In @(Jaicós), June 7, @(Piauí), while repairing the car. So many new things happened during this long trip that it seems almost impossible to write down everything interesting that happened in order. It was also impossible to write: we were always in the car, or at some guesthouse to eat, or at night, already very tired, going to sleep somewhere without enough light. I intend to make up for this time as soon as possible. After a long wait, we finally left @(João Pessoa) on Monday, May 31, not at noon or late afternoon, but only at 11 pm. We were all very hungry, so we stopped to eat something. It was already midnight when we left the city. Everything went well and after a few hours we arrived in @(Itabaiana), where we spent the night at the house of our &(driver João Gomes de Brito). Instead of leaving in the morning, we were only able to leave around lunchtime. Without interruption, we saw again the second largest city in Paraíba, Campina Grande. João knew how to combine business with pleasure on this trip. He bought merchandise to sell further inland for a large profit. We spent almost the entire afternoon in Campina Grande, and only left at night. At this time of year, the region is all green, the rainy season is over and the harvest is beginning. A very different impression from the one I had two months ago, when we first passed through here. The sugar cane is now large and ripe. Very close to Campina Grande, at about 8 pm, a steering part of the car broke. Thank God, nothing happened, even though we were going high speed. The car shook, but ended up stopping on the road. The problem could not be fixed quickly, and we had to return to Campina Grande to spend the night. It was the first breakdown in the car, a stop that delayed the trip. The next day, June 1st, the car's defect was fixed and the trip continued along familiar roads to @(Patos). This time, the @(Serra da Viração) also exerted the same fascination when I could see the long and wide valley from above. Before that, another part of the car broke on the open road - the car's second defect - but it was able to be fixed on site by the driver himself. However, it was another involuntary stop that took us away from our long-awaited objective. We did not stop in @(Patos) and went straight to @(Pombal), where we met up with our old acquaintances and had dinner. Here we are in the dry region, as in @(Pernambuco). According to what we were told, this region begins in @(Pernambuco) and extends through @(Paraíba), @(Rio Grande do Norte), @(Ceará) and even far into @(Piauí). The Piranhas River, on the way to Pombal, had dropped considerably by this time, so that we were able to cross without a boat. Upon our arrival, already in the dark of night, the boatmen immediately appeared, about thirty of them, who recognized us from the last incident there and eagerly offered to transport the car, since, according to them, it would not be possible to cross the river. We, however, had information to the contrary and so we advanced through the water, leaving the money-hungry boatmen behind in the darkness. Unfortunately, the water was still so deep that it managed to get into the radiator and forced us to make another involuntary stop for almost an hour. The problem was soon solved and shortly after 10 pm we arrived in Sousa, where we spent the night in the hotel we already knew.
The next day, early in the morning, we headed to @(Cajazeiras) and from there, through regions unknown to me: to @(Ceará). The landscape is the same everywhere, almost without differences, only one or another plant or bush appears more frequently. @(Alagoinha) is the first town in @(Ceará). Moments later, the slightly larger @(Lavras). Wherever we arrived, people would soon appear, surrounding the car and asking questions. It seems that a truck always appears here as a novelty, a wonder, or else people are very curious or, what seems more likely, they expect some gain. From what I have gathered from these people, they would do anything for money, even the most impossible. In @(Lavras), the large square in front of the church stands out, surrounded by some brick houses, and further away the poor mud huts. We obtained information about the conditions of the road ahead of us, and continued on our journey in the scorching heat. I was on the truck, in a suitable place, because there, at least, I could move around and, above all, I had the best and most open view in all directions. We passed through low forests, a dry region, with the leaves beginning to fall. It was the beginning of summer. There are only two seasons here: winter or the rainy season for 4-5 months; and the remaining months are summer, when everything is dry and there is no water anywhere. About a league after @(Lavras) the road to @(Crato) crosses - from up there I saw it very well - and that was what I said when we turned onto a less frequented road and apparently went the wrong way. I couldn't make my opinion count since I wasn't sure either, and we continued on a road that wasn't good but still passable. After a few hours we arrived at a small town, @(São José), where they told us that we had taken the wrong path and that we would do better to turn back. People's opinions varied greatly. They also said that another road would reach @(Crato) passing through @(Várzea Alegre). It was unpleasant to take the same route twice and return, but in the end we followed the road to @(Várzea Alegre), where we arrived in the afternoon and had lunch there. The road was very bad and we advanced very slowly. The constant rocking and shaking were not at all pleasant, everything was very tiring. After @(Várzea Alegre), the road got worse and worse, we advanced with great difficulty. I think it would be faster on foot; on horseback, certainly. One hill after another, where there was a flat stretch, was always cut by the ditches caused by the road.
by the recent rains or full of large rocks. Then, near some huts, we saw a party going on. Fireworks were rising into the night sky, full of stars that seemed very close; in one of the huts, in the dark, people were singing and praying loudly. A beautiful image. @(Várzea Alegre) is one of the few blessed places in this landscape, where you can always find water. Rice and all other crops grow magnificently here. With the poor state of these roads, it was not possible to travel at night, we had to stop. Luckily, I found a hammock in a hut, very small, but it was better than nothing. Without dinner and very tired, I fell asleep soon, after arranging some belongings by the light of my lighter. Despite the wind blowing through the walls of the hut, I slept all night. The place was called @(Guariba).
On June 3rd, we continued on, the road getting worse and worse, almost impassable. We often had to stop to improve the road, covering the many holes with earth. After @(Monte Alegre) the car stopped in the middle of a river, the @(Riacho da Fortuna), and slowly began to sink. The goods and luggage had to be unloaded, and the road repaired. The car got out with great difficulty, and after loading everything again, we continued slowly. During this stop I took a refreshing bath in a deeper part of the river. There are great difficulties here in regard to bathing and cleaning. In general, a
The basin is very small - if you are lucky - and often the water is already dirty before you bathe. The dusty roads, the open space on the truck, everything helps to load the body with dirt. More and more often we had to stop to improve the impassable path. In @(Cipó), in the afternoon, for lunch we had cooked corn on the cob, a very tasty food when you are hungry. Unbelievable how high the prices are, you pay at least double. Once again late at night, in the dark, we reached an impassable hill with great difficulty. After much discussion we decided to sleep to see what we could do with the morning light. A country boy in a nearby house woke up from his sleep and with work and patience we put together some hammocks. Soon I fell asleep on a pile of freshly harvested rice, without having had dinner. I was extremely tired. People are on the one hand hospitality itself, and on the other, they try to get as much money as possible.
The next morning I found a gentler slope above the impassable hill. It was §(June 4). By this time we could have been in @(Teresina) if the journey had been without interruptions. The place where we spent the night this time was called @(Cedro). A beautiful undulating landscape, with fields richly planted with corn, sugar cane, cassava, etc. Sometimes there are some tall trees, but here too the low scrubland predominates. The people live in a natural simplicity that is admirable. An absence of demands that can be seen in rare places. The road ahead was even worse than before. We drove at a slow pace for a short stretch, then had to stop to repair the worst parts. There were many precipices and slopes to be negotiated. We traveled along a stream, dry at this time of the year, covered with large and small stones, which could better be regarded as a mountain stream than a highway; This is very much alive in my memory. Something to note is the diversity of opinions of the local population. One says that the road is partly passable, another says the opposite. One says that it is so many miles to the next town, another says something completely different. They say that a road can be easily covered in two hours, while we needed five hours for the same route. After countless difficulties, we finally arrived in the afternoon at a small town, @(Ipueira), from where a good road continues to @(Crato). Once again, after a few days, we had some more or less familiar food, and again cigarettes. After a short stay, we continued on.
to @(Crato) when it was already getting dark. The happiness for the better road and for the next @(Crato) didn't last long. On a steep climb, the car tilted too much and almost fell down the cliff. I was already jumping out of the car when it stopped. We had to unload the merchandise and our luggage at night, without lights. Then, with our combined strength, we managed to get the car out of the dangerous position. Obstacle overcome! Meanwhile, a light rain was falling. The merchandise and our luggage were loaded again, and off we went. However, @(Crato) didn't want to arrive, it was raining harder, I got all wet, and now I'm glad I didn't catch a cold. Finally, after midnight, we arrived at @(Crato). I was very tired. We knocked on all sides of a hotel until it opened. I quickly found a hammock and was already asleep. The next day, Sunday, June 5, I was treated to a nice shower at the hotel. @(Crato) is a small town also located in a region where there is never a shortage of water. That is why you can see green coconut trees here, like everything else in the surrounding area, all cultivated, everything growing like in Paradise. We were happy because the bad road was over and in front of us there was a good highway. Around noon we left, and I could see the river around @(Crato) again, in a blessed landscape. The road went up to the top of @(Serra de Araripe). There, you can also see a real tall forest. I also saw orchids on the trees. However, I did not want to stop the car, because we were very behind schedule. The road went on for hours completely straight, if we had been in better conditions we could have developed a good speed. The further away from @(Crato), the lower the forest became, until it returned to being a forest of bushes. You rarely see any huts, which here, in general, are made of clay with a straw roof. On the way, what got in the way was the cattle, which calmly stood on the road, stopped a few meters from the car, forcing us to swerve or scare them away. At night we arrived in @(Araripe), a small town, a village. Here, for the first time, they asked us for our documents, with a posture of great importance. I think that here, for long distances, beds are not known; everywhere people sleep in hammocks. The next day, §(June 6), my 37th birthday, took us from @(Araripe) via @(Campos Salles), the last town in @(Ceará) on this stretch to @(Piauí). Here too, as everywhere else, an arid region, the leaves have already fallen from the trees; in other regions, the bushes are bare. It is already summer. According to what I was told, cattle go 6-7 months without water in the summer. Here too, we traveled for hours on a straight road as an arrow. Often long stretches of sandy land. The sky is constantly changing in color. At night, the stars seem to be closer to the earth than in the sky of Paraíba. Maybe because we are far from the influence of the sea or maybe because we are further north? We passed through two villages, here called cities, @(Socorro) and @(Boa Esperança). Both consist of a large square in front of the church, surrounded by houses, and then one or two streets - all very poor. Almost at night we arrived in @(Jaicós), a small and very nice city. Since it was already late yesterday, we spent the night here and will leave early today. We had barely left the city when another unforeseen event occurred: the car's water pump broke and we didn't have a spare. Thank God, there was no more serious accident and we were close to a city. So, we are still here in Jaicós. It is already past 3 pm and we hope that @(João) will somehow fix the car. I take advantage of these hours and write as well as I can since I'm running out of ink. I hope that today we'll reach @(Picos), a larger city, from where it would also be easier to find a continuation. This trip seems to be unfortunate.


[95]
@(Jaicós) [PI] - [Wednesday] - June 8th
Today the car was repaired as best as possible. Tomorrow the trip should continue. I hope we reach our destination and that the car doesn't break down again. I'm taking advantage of my free time to rest and write a letter to Tânia, who is certainly worried about not hearing from me for so long. Last night I was at the house of the local priest - born in @(Munich), big and fat - and there I listened to the radio. The climate here is great: at night it's cool, and the wind blows for hours. Life here is quite monotonous. As in many cities in this region, there is no electricity or running water. But there is good drinking water. In front of the centuries-old church (1837), there is the usual cross on a stone pedestal and the large square where pigs, cows and donkeys graze peacefully and contentedly. There is no post office, letters are entrusted to travelers. Traffic is minimal: when a truck appears, it is passing through. Years ago, the reisado (bumba meu-boi) was performed.


[96]
@(Jaicós) [PI] - [Thursday] - June 9th
It's 5pm and the damage to the truck still can't be repaired. Another day lost. In the morning I was in the outskirts of @(Jaicós) - it's the real #backlands: sand or gravel, low bushes, lots of juremas.


[96-98]
@(Picos) @(Piauí) - [Friday] - June 10th


Today we finally left @(Jaicós). At 2:00 AM, we started preparing for the trip, packing our luggage and equipment in the truck. When the clock struck 4:00 AM, we actually set off. The trip continued without interruptions until @(Picos). At first it was cold, but not as cold as from @(Patos) to @(Campina Grande), on the first trip back from the interior. A wonderful sky full of stars. It was beautiful to see the day slowly dawn: a light streak like a white cloud, getting stronger and stronger, until it was clear. At 6:00 AM it was daylight. The landscape to @(Jaicós) for a long stretch is a desperate caatinga, #sertão, sand and gravel. Very rarely a house - an abandoned region. Before @(Picos) it got a little better: a new and large carnauba plantation, then you can also see cotton plantations and fruit trees along with corn, beans and cassava. The flat landscape also ended before @(Picos) and became undulating. After @(Picos) you can see long, bare hills. @(Picos) is larger than @(Jaicós), but it is also far from traffic. There is electric light, but I don't know if it lights up. Here we will leave &(João's) vehicle, because continuing the journey with it does not seem safe after the breakdown. If we still have the chance today, we will continue in another truck. I already feel unpleasantly moved by the long journey, which will take a few more days to get to @(São Luís). And to think that the maximum planned time for this trip was 5-6 days. For more than eleven days I have been without a decent shower, without a clean room, without clean accommodations to sleep in, without well-prepared food. In addition, it is tiring and I cannot work. Fifteen days will be needed for the entire journey. I am happy to arrive at the next larger city, where I will be able to stay and work for a few days.


[98-99]
@(Inhuma) @(Piauí) - [Saturday] - June 11th
We left @(Picos) late in the afternoon, when it was already getting dark. We said goodbye to &(João), who, in addition to wasting time, also had to return with an unloaded car. It also took a few words to reach an agreement regarding the payment for his work. Traveling with his car to @(Teresina) would be too risky. So we now traveled in a smaller, fully loaded truck. After @(Picos) we climb a mountain. Up there, there are tall bushes and the path is generally good. However, there is always a lot of sand, which made it difficult to advance. For a long time we followed the flat back of the mountain with endless straight paths. A beautiful starry sky, and it was not as cold as the last few nights. During the day, in Picos, it was especially hot. Before @(Inhuma) the path goes down almost constantly, and the bushland is often interrupted to give way to grassy fields (now, after the rains). Also yesterday the whole region was arid except for 2-3 small irrigated fields. @(Picos) is a little bigger; Ipiranga and Inhuma, the usual small villages: without electricity, with their main square and a few brick houses around.


[101-104]
@(Saint Louis) @(Maranhao) - [Wednesday] - June 15th
Last night, after a complicated train journey, we arrived here tired. From @(Teresina) I went with my luggage to the @(Parnaíba River), the river that divides @(Piauí) and @(Maranhão), which in this region is about 150m wide. @(Teresina) is located on one of the banks; @(Flores), a small town in @(Maranhão), is on the other. An iron bridge is currently being built, so that soon the train will go from @(São Luís) to @(Teresina). For now, we have to cross the river by boat. Our crossing was quick and the train was already waiting for us in @(Flores). After a long wait under the scorching midday sun, the train left promptly at 3:00 p.m. Despite the intense heat, it is forbidden to travel on the train without a coat. The train's boiler, heated with wood, requires frequent stops to refuel, and the water also has to be replenished several times. The hot sparks that constantly enter through the windows are unpleasant, and if you don't pay close attention, you'll soon get a burn on your suit. This time I got out without any injuries. From @(Flores) to @(Teresina), on both sides, you can see only forests of babassu, this beautiful, tall palm tree with its many fruits, large nuts on a long tassel. Only after 10-12 years does the babassu produce its first fruits. The long, wide leaves are used to build houses. The roofs in this region are almost all made of palm leaves; the frames of the houses are made of the strong, straight, arrow-like trunks of the same palm trees. The walls are also often made of palm leaves; sometimes they are also made of the flexible ribs of the leaves. Even the fences are made of this material. This palm tree is used for everything, the fruit of which yields an excellent oil that is much sought after - a very beautiful image. In any case, the fruits of this palm tree are not yet used as much as would be possible, given the extraordinary richness of the natural conditions. However, in the intense heat, on the slow-moving train, the ever-changing view of the babassu forests becomes very tiring and hypnotic. Every now and then you see a palm house with its inhabitants, usually dark-colored. After a three-hour journey from @(Flores), the train stops in @(Caxias), where it stays overnight. Since the train has no dining car or dormitory, we were forced to spend the night and have dinner in a nearby guesthouse. The city of @(Caxias) is larger than one might imagine at first glance and seems to have been founded long ago. You can see old, beautiful and interesting houses. The next day the journey continued at 4:00 a.m. and again there were only babassu forests on both sides of the train, a little
mixed with other trees. Again, I could see a house made of palm leaves. Where there are more houses, a station, which occurs more or less every hour. For lunch, a longer stop, we could eat at a nearby guesthouse. From @(Rosário) onwards the landscape changes, as we approach the sea. Large plains and woods of bushes are already reached by the tide. We cross a bridge over an inlet and arrive at the island on which @(São Luís) stands, the proud capital of @(Maranhão). It seems to me larger than @(João Pessoa) and with a richer life in every aspect. Beautiful old houses, and as in @(Bahia), the walls are often covered with tiles. This city is also in the process of renovation - houses are demolished, new, wider streets, squares and houses appear in their place.


[104-107]
@(Saint Louis) [MA] - [Saturday] - June 18th
Yesterday we made the first recordings here - in @(João Paulo), as the place is called. The songs are called doctrines and the whole thing, tambor-de-mina. The main character, a robust black woman, named &(Maximiliana). The doctrines, with few exceptions, are sung while dancing. The dancers' bodies are always erect, unlike the xangô, even when a solo dancer makes quick circular movements. What drives the movement here are the arms, which constantly reproduce the expression and content of the songs. Since there were only two or three men among the more than twenty participants, pair dances were discarded from the beginning. They are circle dances (in a circle), with the faces always turned towards the instruments and movements back and forth in synchrony. There are also dances in the same place, with figurations of the feet and arms; they are apparently free dances in which each person dances in their own way. The space, a terreiro, is 8m X 12m, but only the front half is completely used. All of them were barefoot on the sandy ground. The clothes were multifaceted, in terms of color. The sleeveless white blouse, the white, red, yellow, green skirt, but according to information, the dance was supposed to be in only one color. The participants were almost all black or mixed-race, all dark-skinned. The ages varied greatly: the youngest dancers were probably around fourteen years old, but most were older women and, as already mentioned, only a few men danced with them, sometimes without any male figures. The house is tall and covered with palm leaves. Only one wall is closed from top to bottom. On the inside, three figures of saints can be seen. At night, three candles are lit and three letters: F(is) E(m) G(od) [sic]. In front of this wall are the instruments. From left to right: calabash - swung by a man, rarely by a woman; gong - an iron shell, about a centimeter thick, three percussion instruments, they call them drums. The two outer ones are the same, elongated iron drums on wooden frames, beaten by hand. The middle one, a hollow wooden trunk, more than 1m long, closed only at the top with ox leather, also beaten by hand. These three are played only by men. They, the drums, are called by male names. A soloist begins to sing, then only the gong enters, later the calabash and then, one after the other, the three drums. The choir responds or repeats the soloist's phrase. The doctrines are usually very short, often lasting only a few bars. Unfortunately, there were no good voices: the soloists were hoarse, the choir was very heterogeneous. It was not possible to make a good recording. In the middle of a song, they would stop singing and start again at their own will. I heard here a mixture of xangô, catimbó and coco - the songs come from all sides.


[107-108]
[ship] Itapagé - (Between São Luís and Belém) - [Tuesday] - June 21st
Fate would have it that the trip to @(Belém) was made on the same ship we boarded when leaving Santos. In @(São Luís) we were still able to make some recordings of the tambor-de-crioulo. Three drums, the rhythm is interesting, but the songs have little musical value. They do not have the richness (variety) and there is no comparison with the tambor-de-mina. The most important thing is the dance, which has a tendency towards sexual appeal. It is danced by men and women in front of the instruments. They beat their hips against each other. One woman stood out in particular: she was strong and big and almost no man could resist her beat. In @(São Luís) and the surrounding area there must be even more drums, according to what they say, even better than the ones we recorded. There must also be some very good bumba-meu-boi. After the tambor-de-crioulo, we recorded some
Very beautiful bumba-meu-boi songs, also in João Paulo, a suburb of São Luís. There, there is only one animal - the Ox. The songs are like everywhere else: the main singer or master starts and everyone else responds. The accompaniment consists of two maracas, three tambourines and 6-7 rattles. The first verse is sung only by the master, then the whole choir responds together with the instruments beating the rhythm, but still in a way that clearly recognizes the song. Then the master sings solo again, but this time with a deafening noise from the instruments and people in the choir. Then the choir again, and so on. These are some of the most beautiful songs we have recorded to date in bumba-meu-boi.


[109-111]
@(Belém) [PA] - [Wednesday] - June 22nd
We left São Luís in the rain and arrived at Belém in the evening in torrential rain. Due to the narrow and shallow mouth of the sandy entrance to São Luís, a larger ship can only dock or leave at high tide. There are still no decent port facilities, and the vessels have to be anchored offshore. As soon as we reached the open sea, with the ship almost empty, our old friend Itapagé began to rock so much that even I had a headache. The rocking continued almost all the way to Belém. Well before Belém we entered fresh water. A pilot coming by boat showed us the right way to go. For a long time we followed the banks of the green forest, getting closer and closer. On the right we recognized the banks of Marajó Island - covered with verdant forest. The passage between the islands and dry land is often less than 50 m wide. From afar we could already see lights that belonged to @(Belém). The rain got heavier and upon arrival it was so heavy that we could not get off the ship. After an hour, the rain eased a little. I went ashore after the police checkpoint, where even my bags had to be opened. An inspection that reminded us of the war. However, I managed to get through without opening my bags. We went to the hotel - a real showpiece. Large, clean rooms, good service and everything you could want. Naturally the price is a little high - a night costs 30 mil-réis. As always, the first few days are spent getting to know the city and its life. Wide streets with remarkably tall mango trees that provide ample and rich shade. A new and good theater, large gardens. The city is situated in greenery. A good memory is the Goeldi Garden, where you can see the strangest birds, animals and plants from here and nearby. The facilities are modern and well-kept. The red marsh birds, the various and multicolored water birds, as well as parrots, macaws, parakeets, rheas, and many other land and water birds can be admired in high and airy aviaries. I particularly liked a lemon-yellow parrot. There are many species of very small monkeys, white or brown, up to a meter tall with black fur. There are jaguars, foxes and many other animals. It would take a lot of time to visit the @(Goeldi Garden) in detail. Unfortunately, there are few orchids. And right here, which must be one of the richest natural regions in @(Brazil).


[111-113]
@(Mosqueiro) [PA] - [Friday] - June 25th
It takes two hours by boat to get from @(Belém) to @(Mosqueiro), the city located on the island of the same name. Upon arrival, I looked closely from Itapagé to the landing site and thought it was dry land. There must be a great variety of bumba-meu-boi here, but so far we haven't recorded anything. The island is a kind of resort for the rich people of @(Belém). So, many people came with us on the eve of São João. Many country houses and well-planned streets. In a few years, it could become a luxurious resort. The beaches are wonderful! Unfortunately, there is little prospect for our objectives. I was able to see part of the island on a car ride that was offered to us by the mayors here and in @(Belém). The large number of bonfires all over the city on the eve and day of São João is remarkable. Firecrackers, mortars and other types of fireworks are seen in astonishing quantities. According to what I was told, this is the biggest popular festival of the year here. Lights and sounds explode throughout the night of São João. Apparently, people don't sleep. Also very interesting is the @(Belém) market in the morning - it is only like this at this time of day. There, herbs are sold there that have a particularly penetrating scent. A perfumed bath is prepared from these herbs and must be taken exactly at midnight before São João. In this bath, all good wishes for the body and spirit are expressed, such as health and happiness. Wishes are granted, love is reciprocated and health comes. There must be few native people who on this day do not wear on their heads a green crown of mesquite, a type of tall moss. This brings happiness, youth and charm for an entire year, until the following year's São João, when the same ceremony has to be repeated to remain effective. Two people jump together, holding each other's hands, and say the following words: Saint John said, Saint Peter confirmed: that we will be compadres (or cousins, fiancés, etc.) because Jesus Christ commanded - (The other repeats how the first began, speaking or singing) - because Jesus Christ commanded. The bonfires are usually lit again on Saint John's day. Here in @(Mosqueiro) there are also large mango trees. At harvest time, the people here must eat a lot of mangoes to eat them all, which here in @(Pará) are especially tasty. The leaves of the mango trees are a dark green color tending towards black. We cannot forget the countless fish that are caught here, from the small ones to the large ones, which weigh up to one hundred and eighty kilos.


[114]
@(Belém) [PA] - [Saturday] - June 26th
This morning we returned by boat from @(Mosqueiro). Two days lost without making a single recording. We haven't worked here either. After lunch I took the tram to Pedreiras, a suburb of Belém, where I discovered two bumba-meu-boi, one of which had no musical interest; the other, also with only recent hits, but somewhat more popular with remarkably short melodies. It gives the impression that all these toys are trying to replace the old and good musical art rooted in the people with the so-called regional music without content originated by the radio. @(Pedreiras), built with wide streets, no longer receives the attention of the Government, because tall grass and weeds grow in the streets and avenues. There is only a narrow pedestrian crossing that has been squeezed on both sides of the streets, very close to the houses. Our trip back to @(São Paulo) should probably start on the 30th of this month or on July 1st. So, anyway, next month I'll be at home, with &(Tatiana), &(Tamara) and &(Renata).


[115-118]
@(Belém) [PA] - [Friday] - July 1st
Yesterday and the day before, we finally made the first recordings in @(Belém). It's a shame we didn't make better use of the days: the city is full of boi-bumbá, as the bumba-meu-boi is called here. It is precisely on these days that it is performed: during the time of Saint John and occasionally Saint Peter. After months of preparation, the boi-bumbá is presented to the public. This year, the city government, for the first time, protected these toys, allocating prizes to the best groups and placing advertisements in the newspapers. The local radio station broadcast the songs during the awards ceremony. In @(São Brás), a suburb of @(Belém), I attended the presentations that were open to the public. From what I heard, 10-12 boi-bumbás signed up for the competition. Probably those who live in the city or near it. In each small town, a boi is formed and presented annually. This gives you an idea of how creative the people here are, because every year a large part of the songs are replaced by new ones, if not all of the songs, as seems to be the case in some bois. The competition was undoubtedly created with the best intentions, but it introduced a lot of commercial music into the bois. Originally, the accompaniment was only done with percussion instruments. Here at the competition I have heard trumpets, trombones, violins and the drums used in jazz. For the city's population, the original accompaniment is no longer enough - they want it to be more urban, the better. Also, the songs freely invented by the people have to give way to those artificially created by the teacher. In a few years, I think the primitive popular form of the boi will be replaced by a type of operetta. According to what I have heard, the boi has become considerably more civilized in recent years. Perhaps we have reached the end of its natural period. I regret that the time is not better used and all the available material recorded. Our boi has a name: Father of the Country. About a hundred melodies have been recorded and people still know how to sing many others. There are no animals like in the South, except for the ox. Some new figures appear here, and as everywhere, the master alone begins a song, the choir then responds with the same melody. Thus, the soloist sings a verse, then the choir responds, soloist, choir, and so on. Each melody is repeated several times. The choir always sings the same text to a melody, while the soloist sometimes invents new lyrics to the same melody. The accompaniment, a rhythm that is almost not syncopated, consists of three tambourines beaten with the hands; these are half barrels, (...) open at the bottom and closed with leather on top. Some of the tambourines are beaten with drumsticks. A cuíca - with a constant rhythm: once there, once there: (...) Then 3-4 tambourines, a cheque-cheque, a large and wide ganzá. Also at least 7-8 rattles - these are wooden cubes about 2 cm thick, often struck one on top of the other. Each song is started by the soloist without any accompaniment in the first few bars. There doesn't seem to be a very strict order; the songs are sung as they come to the master's memory. The predominance of men is notable: there are women involved, but they don't have any leadership role. Exactly the opposite of what happens with the tambor-de-mina in @ (São Luís). It's interesting how the soloist, when looking for new words, deviates from the exact melody. The intonation of the strong syllables also gets messy. When the soloist doesn't have a special ability to improvise, it's noticeable that he's satisfied if he managed to keep half of the melody. Especially the soloist who sang the last solo verse deviated completely from the original melody, even shortening or lengthening the number of bars. A perfect example of the way in which the songs here emerge and are sung.


[119]
@(Belém) [PA] - [Saturday] - July 2nd
This morning I was at the @(Goeldi Museum) again. This time I went to the pavilion where you can see rocks, stuffed animals and birds, snakes preserved in alcohol, various types of wood and a very rich collection of Indian objects. Although this collection is interesting to me, it is small and I think something really great could be done with it. Especially because in the huge state of @(Pará) there are still many wild Indians or those far removed from the influence of white people. The beautiful clay pots and artifacts with their characteristic designs, especially those from @(Marajó), are also attractive. It makes me very sad to have to stay here in the city without being able to do any serious work, and that I cannot get to know the interior of this interesting state. I am also so close to the Amazon and I cannot get to know it. The trip is scheduled for the 7th of this month. I hope that it really starts then. The days without work are monotonous and pass slowly.


[120-121]
@(Belém) [PA] - [Monday] - July 4th


Yesterday we recorded the last songs of the boi-bumbá in the old town, in Pai do Campo. Since in this neighborhood people who do not work on Sundays are used to gathering in groups to comment on the most important events and observe every change, the square where the songs were recorded was soon filled with old and young people, which naturally distracted the singers quite a bit. At every moment, the listeners were asked to remain silent, but a certain amount of noise was inevitable. The singers also always had something to say to each other. Around 4:00 p.m. the usual rain began. The light thatched roofs let a few drops through, so we had to interrupt our work for a while. Moments later, a long procession passed by on a nearby street. Once again, the singing was interrupted. The somewhat syncopated rhythm of the boi-bumbá certainly did not disturb the religious atmosphere of the procession, since the brass bands, as the procession passed by, played a well-known soft waltz in slow time. So, I think, yesterday's recordings were not as clean and pure as last time. The dancers also showed less enthusiasm. In all, about one hundred and thirty songs of this boi-bumbá Pai do Campo were recorded. It was a good amount. For &(Tamara) I found a green parrot that must be only a year and a half old. If it is possible to take it home somehow, I will take it.


[121-125]
[ship]
Itanagé, between @(Belém) [PA] and @(São Luís) [MA] - [Friday] - July 8th


Yesterday the trip back home began in earnest. After 8pm we left @(Belém) on the Itanagé, sister ship of the Itapagé, which we came on. Just like when we arrived, it rained yesterday. There would be months of work for us in @(Belém). It's a shame we didn't work the first few days of our stay. I'm glad I got permission to bring a parrot with me. &(Tamara) will be so happy. It would take a lot of money to bring gifts. Typical souvenirs are almost unheard of: most are made for rich foreigners who are passing through. I should be happy if in @(Fortaleza) I can still buy a hammock and spend the rest of the trip without money. I managed to get by with my 100$000 a month. In the last few days we also recorded something beautiful: a babassuê 210, a religious manifestation reminiscent of the xangô of @(Recife), although the dance here is not as provocative and does not take on almost uncontrollable forms. The disciples of the babau Sátiro 211 were only women, most of them over 35 years old, all dressed the same. There were only two men, with the master three, besides the drummers. The choir is divided into two lines, and there is one man in each line. The dance almost always takes place in a circle, the body always erect, the arms move but are never raised to the head, except in a dance in which colored cloths are waved together and in an equal manner. The instruments were three drums (abatãn), a ganzá, a calabash (chericheri) and an agogô with two tones - which was absent on this night. The soloist Sátiro has an unusually pleasant voice and sings confidently. The choir is well trained and responds more or less at the same time. In all, about fifty melodies were recorded. The lyrics have many African passages - some doctrines or points that are exclusively African. The melody is less African - in my opinion, already quite influenced by the music of the whites and perhaps of the Indians. The singing always made a pleasant impression because, mainly due to Sátiro's voice, it sounded clear and natural. The choir was also well rehearsed. The rhythm of the percussion instruments was also uniform, but less interesting. Four modes were played, the most notable being:
(...)
Also on the day of our departure, about fifteen melodies were recorded, sung by Sátiro. The first ones were from the babassuê, mourning songs, which are only sung when a member of the terreiro dies. Very beautiful songs. The other melodies originate from the shamanism of the Indians: Pena and Maracá. Sátiro learned about them in @(Marajó) with the Indians. I really regret not having gone to the interior of the state and to @(Marajó Island). An opportunity like this so close will never happen again. Or will I ever have the chance to come to @(North of Brazil) again? That's how destiny works. This trip also came unexpectedly for me. In any case, I am taking away a profound insight into the popular music from here. I heard and saw how the people here are tireless in their creation and how the African influence is expressed. Heaven could not have given me a richer gift than this trip so full of changes.


[125]
To @(Saint Louis) [MA] - [Saturday] - July 9th
In the morning I was in @(São Luís). There was no letter from &(Tânia). At least I will bring her something to be happy about: a beautiful hammock. I think I made a good purchase. A handcrafted work from @(São Bento), near @(São Luís), which seems to be strong, resistant, and is very large. I paid $50,000. So I was able to satisfy this wish. It will probably not be used much in @(São Paulo): outdoors it is often very cool and rainy; indoors, there is not enough space, or rather, there are not enough hooks to hang it. The trip so far has not been without setbacks. For me it is pleasant, because I can rest. It is not hot while sailing, because it is common for a refreshing wind to blow. Only at night, in the cabin, does it get oppressively hot, and I do not sleep well. The day after tomorrow, we should arrive in Fortaleza. I have no money, an unpleasant feeling and still have ten days of travel ahead of me.


[126]
[in transit] - Sunday - July 10th
A wonderful morning today: almost no clouds and only water around, but still a faint line of land can be seen. I was with &(Pacheco) - who always feels bad on ships - and I took my parrot. A very tame and trustworthy animal. It is good for &(Tamara), so she can hold it in her hand without danger. She will be very happy. I hope it arrives safely in @(São Paulo). Unfortunately, I have only just managed to read some books about the life and customs of black people. I should have done so before the trip. I would certainly have understood black songs and singers in a different way. It is a study that I will do with great pleasure if conditions permit. As far as I know, almost nothing has been done in this field and even now something can be done. In my opinion, the little pure, uninfluenced black music that still exists will soon be forgotten. It is persecuted and eradicated by the police in every way.


[127-128]
To @(Fortaleza) [CE] - [Monday] - July 11th
From afar I could see the sprawling city, located only 1-2 meters above sea level. Further in the background, some mountain ranges. Since there is no pier yet, the ship stays offshore and a motorboat takes the passengers to land. There are almost always high waves here, and boarding and disembarking the boat requires great skill. From what I saw, the city has only straight streets, all well-paved. There is also a large flow of trams, buses and taxis. Life in the city is a bit like @(São Paulo) - everything seems to be geared towards business. There are even some tall buildings. The most important aspect for the city, and also for the state of Ceará, is the construction of a modern port. And this work, so difficult due to the unfavorable conditions here, is about to begin soon. I regret that I only stayed a few hours. Without a guide, you wander aimlessly and you will certainly miss the most beautiful and interesting places to visit. The tall, long sand dunes on the beach have a captivating effect. We are in the Northeast, on the edge of the arid region. Perhaps later, I will have the opportunity to get to know this city, as well as the entire @(State of Ceará) in more depth.


[128-129]
To @(Macau) [RN] - Tuesday - July 12th
Early in the morning, the Itanagé dropped anchor far from land. I couldn't see any houses, just a thin white strip of sand. Occasionally a low hill and in some places small bushes. Beyond that, it must be somewhere in the city of Macau. Four huge sailboats arrive, loaded with bags of salt weighing about fifty kilos each. Four cranes work at the same time. Each time, at least twenty bags are taken off the sailboat and loaded onto our ship. Even so, the work lasted until almost 2 pm, and now we are back at sea again: all around us there is only water. Later tonight, the Itanagé should arrive in Natal. So we slowly head home to &(Tânia), &(Tamara) and &(Renata). Although I am fine, I feel a little tired in my body. It is the effect of the trip on land. I rarely get to work, because there is always something new on the ship. Some passengers who insist on playing horrible music on an old, out-of-tune piano are unbearable. And now, on top of everything else, more passengers have boarded. There are more people on board than would be agreeable for the limited freedom of movement.


[129-130]
After @(Christmas) [RN] - Wednesday - July 13th
Now @(Natal) is also behind us. The Itanagé remained idle for several hours in the open sea until it entered the @(Port of Natal) at 6 a.m. It seems that the port authorities only started working at 6 a.m. The trip from @(Macau) to @(Natal) took about twelve hours. At first, all you can see are the high hills of white sand with small houses on top, the towers and masts of a radio station, and a stone breakwater. A small anchorage for at most two medium-sized boats. I didn't see much of the city. I went ashore and boarded an electric tram to see the city. I expected more than I saw. All the time, there were only small single-story houses. The houses that looked a little better were government buildings. Some small shopping streets and little else. But it seems that here too, in recent years, the desire for progress has increased. You can see many houses in a more modern style and some wide streets, in addition to other necessary improvements. Natal made a poor impression on me. Of the capitals of the @(Northeast) and @(North), @(Natal) is the smallest and most backward, the poorest. Today, for the first time, the Itanagé left on time.


[130-131]
@( Maceió) [AL] - Friday - 15th [July]
Yesterday we spent the day in @(Recife). Naturally, my first activity was to look for &(Bosch) to pick up the clothes I had left there. I was surprised, because I could no longer find the store. After a few questions, I discovered that the address belonged to the &(Bosch) company, and that the company is now on another street. So I went to the new address, where I was informed that &(Bosch) had traveled and would return in the afternoon with the ship. I asked for his home address and they delivered my belongings to me there in perfect condition. Waiting here for a ship is a dubious situation, because the arrival time is almost never met. That was also the case this time: the ship was supposed to arrive at 4:00 p.m., but it only arrived at 7:00 p.m. So I was only able to spend an hour with &(Bosch). Thank God, he is fine. We discovered that a pair of pajamas sent by &(Tatiana) and that I had already thought were lost were stored in his store. He will send the pajamas to @(São Paulo). A trip to @(Olinda) didn't work out because it didn't stop raining. Too bad, because I would have liked to visit the school, the church and the beach with fishermen's houses. I couldn't even take a photo. We left after 8pm - the trip is slowly reaching its goal. I can't wait for the day I arrive and meet up with my family again.


[132-134]
(To Bahia) [BA] - Sunday - July 17th
There are only a few days left and I will be home with Tânia, Tamara and I will meet Renata. The Itanagé has been rocking a lot for a few days now, and although we haven't seen any big waves, it's not going to get any better. The weather has been rainy since @(Recife). I intended to take some photos on the way back, but it hasn't been possible yet. In @(Bahia), where the ship unfortunately stayed for a few hours, I was able to take six photos, but I don't know if they will turn out well due to the lack of sun. This time, @(Bahia) pleased me much more than on the way there. The unmistakable lower city with its old tall houses with large windows. In @(Bonfim), a well-known pilgrimage site, you can see how well preserved the old and beautiful church is, the @(Santa Maria do Bonfim). Even today, it holds great fascination for the population. The church is probably not the oldest, nor is it the prettiest or the best decorated of the many well-known and beautiful churches in Bahia. But for the people, near and far, it is precisely the miraculous Virgin Mary who has a deeply rooted name. One sees large cabinets full of donations. One of the rooms was filled with cards, photographs and portraits, in which the donor gratefully records how and when he was saved or cured of an illness by the Holy Virgin. In the same room, the ceiling was covered with wax body parts, usually feet and hands. Here too, a cure from an illness took place. Someone who was already healthy would offer the limb that was cured, faithfully copied in wax. Even the wound or illness is represented. I also went to the @(Historical and Geographical Institute of Bahia), where there is a room with musical instruments and utensils used by black people in their religious activities. There is much beauty, but I think that compared to the wealth of @(Bahia) it is still not enough. I regret that our stay was so short. There would be an unimaginable amount of work here, the harvest would be rich. And in our time, this musical direction, so important for @(Brazil) is becoming extinct. In two months, we could, with well-structured work, collect documentation that would be fundamental for the future. The view from the upper city to the wide bay of @(Bahia) is wonderful. Yesterday's walk was exceptionally beautiful. The sunset poured a wonderful profusion of colors over the water and the increasingly smaller houses of the city. At first yellow and then turning to a fiery red. It slowly got darker, the colors dissolved, the houses of Bahia disappeared, the coast became increasingly difficult to see - goodbye Bahia...


[134-136]
(To Vitória) [ES] - Monday - July 18th
The beautiful @(Vitória) is also behind us. The sky is still overcast, but the weather is generally a little better. We spent a little over two hours in @(Vitória): now it seems that the ship is in a hurry. Tomorrow we will arrive in @(Rio). The journey that seemed so long is coming to an end. In @(Vitória) I took some photographs. I regretted that the weather was not better and that the sun was not shining brighter. Just as on the outward journey, so now the entrance made a strong impression on me. Often you sail only 15-20 meters from the rocky coast, at the mouth, which is partly very narrow. The wonderful view of the valleys and coves that reveal themselves as the ship passes, the high rocky mountains, the many islands in the long bay, the many small houses scattered randomly up the mountain slopes and, below, the city with its many beautiful recent buildings. All this together makes a captivating impression. The city is not very large, but it is well-kept and kept clean. The natural beauty of the place with its high mountains in the background dominates the entire landscape. If there were no houses, the natural beauty would probably be greater. It is incredible how the weather influences me. During the last few days, I had no energy for work. I didn't even want to write a few lines here. Now that the sun is shining again and the ship is sailing calmly, I want to do everything at the same time. And I have a lot to work on. My overture, which I started in the @(North), is still far from finished, many musical ideas were only planned. I lack the energy, and right now I have the time available! I regret not having the strength to put in the desired determination. Could it be that my energy comes from the fact that I am almost home, to be with my family?


[136-138]
@(Rio) [de Janeiro] [RJ] - [Tuesday] - July 19th


This morning I admired the wonderful entrance to the bay of @(Rio de Janeiro). &(Mário) was waiting for us on the pier. Unfortunately, he is now in @(Rio) to stay. The &(Culture Department) is under different management. It is a great loss for me that &(Mário) has left there, because he always supported me. And now that I have no one who supports me, what will my position be? We stayed with &(Mário) until noon, then I left my friends and was alone admiring the unique beauty of the city. The progress is unusual: the many buildings, the well-kept parks, the boulevards and the well-kept paved streets with heavy traffic, the shops with their well-arranged shop windows, the well-dressed people, all this made a captivating impression on me. The temperature these days is pleasant, even a little cool. As I walked back and forth through the city, I met my old friend &(Leopardi), the spectacular bass player who worked with me for years at &(Rádio Educadora). If the climate were always like this, and I had a secure job, what could be more pleasant, more desirable than working in this field? “Man thinks and God directs” - as my good mother used to say. From what I can see, São Paulo, with its internal disputes, is losing a lot of its power and status. It is sad that cultural greatness seems to be lost and, consciously or unconsciously, is weakened by influences from higher echelons. Since I feel at home in @(São Paulo), this situation weighs particularly heavily on me. In musical life, the &(Conservatory) has an inexperienced management. Not to mention the &(Culture Department), which now has a completely inadequate new management. Under these conditions, it is natural for the best people to leave and instead of improving, the situation gets worse. @(Rio), on the other hand, shows a slow but steady upward movement and attracts all the good people to it. Only from @(São Paulo) do I know top-quality people who have settled here. Right now I am once again full of desire to work and with an impetus to create. May God give me the strength to keep this spirit up. As a composer, I would have a great chance of rising, but I don't know how to take advantage of situations well, and this is also how I do with other opportunities that arise. Maybe things will improve if I daily resolve to keep firm the will to work and to do a lot of new and good things. The will is always with me, but unfortunately more in the subconscious. I lack the realization, the action, the practice. I haven't lost hope yet.


[139]
@(Rio) [de Janeiro] [RJ] - [Wednesday] - July 20th
@(Rio) is also behind me. I will probably be home by this time tomorrow. It seems like a dream to me, after six months back at home with &(Tânia), &(Tamara), and to me, the still unknown &(Renata). How happy &(Tamara) will be with the parrot! How are my orchids and how are the birds living in the big new aviary? The whole house will be a new experience for me. So, this trip is also behind me. Will I ever go back to the @(North)? I am sorry I didn't go to @(Marajó Island), that I didn't take a trip through the @(Amazonas) and that I didn't go to the interior of @(Pará). Even so, I must be satisfied: I got to know a little of @(Brazil) and I have a small idea of the gigantic greatness of this beautiful country. Maybe one day I will go to the @(South) or to the depths of the interior of @(Brazil). I think I will hardly see @(Europe) again. I would really like to see my homeland again.



