[187]


PIAUÍ AND ITS ARCHITECTURE


1. A little bit of history


The first pioneers of the lands of @(Piauí) are known. &(Sergeant-Major Baltazar Álvares Pestana), in §(1616), leaves by land, after the French occupation of @(Maranhão); follows the @(Itapicuru and Poti valleys): crosses the territory of @(Piauí) towards @(Pernambuco), where he intended to request war ammunition. In §(1626) &(Frei Cristovam Severim), crosses @(Piauí), leaving @(Maranhão), in search of @(Ceará). In §(1662), &(Domingos Jorge Velho), invades @(Piauí) from its southern end, coming from @(São Paulo); he settled at the confluence of the @(Parnaíba River) with the @(Potí). &(Domingos Jorge Velho) was a native of the @(village of Parnaíba), in @(São Paulo). According to &(Pereira da Costa), the name of @(Rio Parnaíba), was given by this bandeirante “who discovered it, first inhabited its banks, cultivated its lands and located several cattle farms”. The bandeirante from São Paulo followed the @(Gurgea basin). In §(1674), the &(Captain-major Francisco Dias de Avila), first lord of the @(Casa da Torre de Garcia de Avila), of @(Bahia), organizes the expedition to enter @(Piauí), in the @(villages of Gurguas), in determination by orders of the &(Governor General, Viscount of Barbacena). This expedition included @(infantry captain Domingos Afonso Mafrense), - the #“Sertão” - as he was known, for his explorations of the #backlands in the extremes of @(Pernambuco). &(Mafrense), as &(Pereira da Costa) says, “continued on his own, in the discoveries, sometimes with the assistance of partners in the enterprise, sometimes without it”.


[188]
It is of great interest to consult the scheme of penetration notes in @(Piauí), with you in the “Estudos Piauienses” by &(Agenor Augusto de Miranda). “The primitive fluvial path that &(Mafrense) traveled is a huge detour: from @(Cabrobró) he went up the @(São Francisco River) to the @(Rio Grande basin), and from there he went to @(Barra do Rio Preto). He went up the @(Rio Preto) to, possibly the place still called @(Barrinha) today, where the waters of the @(Sape path) flow into the other side of the waters that run to the @(Fresco stream), and fall into the @(Parnaguá) lagoon, naturally, once a large indigenous village center. Crossing the short divide, of just over 17 kilometers of dry plateaus, down the @(Fresco stream), it reached the waters of the @(Gurguéa), formed especially by the @(Paraim river), of whose waters the @(Parnaguá lagoon) is nothing more than a large widening, in a 14 kilometer stretch of its course; and down the @(Gurguéa) it reached the @(Parnaíba); and this enormous loop circumscribes the @(basins of the Piauí and Canindé rivers), the westernmost ones that currently stop flowing, as soon as the summer becomes more intense and they have so much water in the winter”.
It is still &(Agenor de Miranda) who says: “Following the itinerary of &(Mafrense), one sees that he came to populate @(Piauí), going down through @(Gurguéa) to @(Parnaíba), however it is easy to think that his people in the explorations of the last sesmarias obtained, precisely where he established his famous cattle farms, came to find the head of the true invading column, coming from the #backlands of @(Bahia) and @(Pernambuco) and that advanced towards the @(northeast)”.
In §(1696) the @(village of Mocha), created by &(Mafrense) is elevated to parish, its territory being dismembered from the @(parish of NS de Cabrobró), located on the @(left bank of the São Francisco) and belonging to the @(bishopric of Pernambuco).
The direction @(Cabrobró) - @(Oeiras) is the direction of penetration of the bulk of the Bahian column. @(Piauí), originally, was under the ecclesiastical jurisdiction of @(Bahia), passing to that of @(Pernambuco) in §(1676) when its creation dates, and in §(1730) it passed to the @(diocese of Maranhão). In §(1715) the @(territory of Piauí) which until then belonged to the @(captaincy of Bahia) passed to that of @(Maranhão).
[189]
In §(1717), the @(parish of Mocha) was elevated to the category of town; later, when the @(captaincy of Piauí) was created, in §(1758), it was the seat of government. In the year §(1718) the &(Governor General of Brazil) issued a decree, elevating @(Piauí) to an independent captaincy, separating it from the jurisdiction of Maranhão, which was only executed forty years later. In §(1761) by the royal charter of §(June 19), the town was titled city, and, in §(1762) its name was changed to Oeiras, in honor of the &(Count of Oeiras), later &(Marquis of Pombal), minister of &(King D. José I), in honor of whom the captaincy received the name of @(São José do Piauí). @(Oeiras) was the state capital until §(1852). On the date of §(1761), by the same royal charter, the eight towns existing in the captaincy were elevated to the category of towns.
These towns and cities did not grow at will; from the beginning, they followed a plan. The royal charter ordered the governor (José Pereira Caldas):
“I am pleased to order you that, moving on to the aforementioned parishes, after having made a list of the residents who have offered to populate the aforementioned towns, you will summon everyone for specific days, on which, when the people are present, you will determine the most suitable place to serve as a square for each of the aforementioned towns, erecting a pillory in the middle of them, assigning an area to build a church, capable of receiving a suitable number of parishioners, when the population increases, as well as other suitable areas for houses of recreation and audiences, jails, and other public offices, delineating the houses of the residents in a straight line, so that the streets are wide and straight.”
“The officers of the respective chambers, who are elected, and those who succeed them, shall be responsible for giving free of charge the lands requested for houses and yards in the places that have been delineated for this purpose; with the sole obligation that the said houses shall always be built in the same uniform design, on the outside, although on the inside each person shall make them as he sees fit, so that in this way the same beauty is preserved in the towns, and their streets shall have the same width, as assigned to them in the foundations. A district shall always remain next to the same towns, which is competent, not only so that new houses may be built therein, but also so that the towns may be built therein,
[190]
houses in the aforementioned form, but also for public spaces; and this district may not at any time be given as a sesmaria, or as a leasehold in whole or in part without a special order from me, which revokes this; because I am served, may it always remain free for the aforementioned purposes.
“For the purpose of establishing the said towns, you shall sign the land of the parish where each of them is located in their foundations; and thus you, as well as the governors who succeed you, may grant as sesmarias all the vacant lands that are included in the said terms: granting them, however, with the clauses and conditions that I have ordered, except in what pertains to the extension of the land, which I have permitted to be granted to each resident; because within the boundaries of the said towns, and within a distance of six leagues around them, no more than half a league in square may be granted as sesmarias to each resident, so that by increasing the same towns, all future residents may have their land grants.
“I permit, however, that within the aforementioned distance of six leagues a four-league area of land be granted, for the administration of the chamber officials, and for the expenses and works of the council to be covered from their income, leasing those parts of the same land that they deem convenient, as long as they observe what the Ordinance of the Kingdom provides regarding these leases. Outside of the said six leagues, you and your successor governors shall grant the sesmarias in the form of the orders that I have established for the state of @(Brazil).
“After you have completed the foundations of the aforementioned towns in the aforementioned form, giving them the names of the most notable towns in this kingdom, or keeping those of the aforementioned parishes, in the case that they are not barbarians: you will elect the people who will serve in their positions, as determined by the Ordinance”.
It is not necessary to emphasize the value of this document, from an architectural, urban and even moral point of view. Thus, the cities of Piauí surprise us with the number of squares, the architectural unity, the width of the streets and their good layout. These cities, which have been really growing since then, are
[191]
They are presented as if they were designed today, and in compliance with good principles. These cities were already born urbanized.
Another highly interesting expression from the royal charter is the following: “imposing on them the names of the most notable towns in this kingdom, or preserving those of the aforementioned parishes, in the case that they are barbarian”.
The old names of @(Parnaguá), @(Santo Antônio do Surubim); @(NS of Desterro do Rancho do Pato), @(NS of Conceição dos Aroazes); @(NS of Monte do Carmo do Piracuruca); @(Mocha) and etc…, are preserved or changed to: @(Oeiras), @(Valença), @(Marvão), @(Campo-Maior), @(Jurumenha) and etc…
Could this concern for uniformity in toponymy have contributed to Brazilian unity?
Our oldest cities, for the most part, are homonymous with those of old Portugal: - Santarém; Óbidos; Pombal; Viçosa; Barra; Belém; Crato; Bragança, etc…
In fact, those instructions were always followed: thus it was that for the creation of the @(village of Parnaíba), on December 20, §(1762), the governor sent to the senate chamber “a plan to regulate the layout of the village, and then issued the most definitive and threatening orders to reactivate the construction of houses and to make the establishment of the new village in the determined place effective”.
Salaries were also not forgotten, and the senate of the chamber of @(village of Campo-Maior) in §(1764), determined:
“Carpenter’s trade fee - No more shall be paid to a master carpenter per day than the price of 400 rs., to an official, 320; for a door with a shutter, the master giving the wood, 3$200, and the owner giving the wood, 2$000; for a large window, the master giving the wood, 1$550, and not giving the wood 1$000; for a car with all the appliances, made at the master’s expense, 20$000; and not being 18$000.
Masons' fee: - The master mason will earn the same daily wage as that paid to carpenters.”
[192]
In §(1767) the governor of @(Maranhão) sent to the governor of @(Piauí), an official letter about the salary and food of the Indians, in compliance with the royal order of §(6 June 1765):
“and if they are carpenters or bricklayers, the four-day wage, which amounts to 104 réis for each day; and when they are blacksmiths, painters, artisans or goldsmiths, the five-day wage, which amounts to 130 réis per day; and the artisans of the other trades will be regulated proportionally to their quality, with no official mechanic earning a higher wage than the six-day wage, which amounts to 150 réis per day: and all this calculation applies only to men”.
The material used in the constructions - the one who alludes to its quality is the inspector of the Treasury of the Treasury, &(José Nicolau da Costa Freire), in the list of §(1847), about the national properties, existing in the province: “a house of adobe, walled; one with the front walls of stone and clay, and the rest of adobe, walled; one said of adobe; one said of stone and clay, and part of adobe; one said of adobe and another one of adobe”. The list includes twenty-three more farms seized from the Jesuits in §(1760), and confiscated by the crown; a rich heritage that was also formed by a @(third Inspection: that of Canindé). Most of these farms were bequeathed by Mafrense in §(1711) to the Jesuits, who divided them into two groups: @(Capela Grande) and @(Capela Pequena). The creation of inspections dates back to §(1760).
From the reports provided by Pereira da Costa, in his Historical Chronology, and, &(M. Pereira D'Alencastro), in the Historical and Chorographic Chronological Memory of the Province of Piauí (Volume XX-Rev. Inst. Hist. Geogr. Bras. - 1857), these farms were located around Oeiras; and of the twenty-six buildings contained in the said farms, we know that fifteen were covered with tiles and eleven with straw. The @(Inspecção do Piauí) had two farms with chapels: those of @(Brejinho) and @(Cachoeira). The @(farm of Campo Largo), in the @(Inspecção de Canindé), also had a chapel.
We did not visit these farms, because the only primitive buildings that remain are in places that are difficult to access, and they are those of the
[193]
farms: @(Tranqueira), @(Poções), @(Saco) and @(Brejo de Santo Inácio do Canindé). However, &(Mr. Isaías Pereira), administrator of the @(national farms), who renovated some of these buildings, assured us that the constructions were made of rammed earth formed with carnauba trunks, spaced 0.35 apart, and the beams of mameleiro, spaced 0.10 apart and tied with an oxhide whip; stone and clay filling; carnauba trunk framing, and the lath of the same material; hollow tile; beaten earth floor; full and wide window frames; 1.50 m doors, made of pau d'arco; high ceilings; half-height walls; wide and low verandas.
The @(farms of the Canindé Inspection), in §(1844), were part of the dowry of &(princess D. Januária), sister of &(Emperor D. Pedro II), who married &(count D'Aquila).
What we wish to emphasize, however, is that, whether in rural or urban constructions, the lesson of the past was never forgotten: still in §(1849), when studies were being carried out to move the capital to Chapada do Corisco, the governor &(José Antonio Saraiva) returned to @(Oeiras) “leaving everything well-organized, the constructions immediately in order of street layout, and following a well-combined plan”.
In §(1852), the assembly decreed the change of the capital to the new city that was renamed @(Teresina), in honor of the Empress of Brazil, &(D. Teresina Cristina Maria). It is one of the newest cities in @(Piauí), but its formation still followed the principles of the royal charter of §(1761).


II. CLIMATE


&(Agenor Augusto de Miranda) in his “Estudos Piauienses” (Brasiliana), in the chapter on climatology of @(State of Piauí) says: “The climate in the south of the state is mild and pleasant. The sun is not scorching as it is in the north. The nights are cool and even cold. During our excursion we had many nights of 10ºC. The hammock no longer has a reason to be. In many houses the bed is replacing the hammock.
[194]
The advantage of the climate of @(south of Piauí), over that of São Paulo, for example, is its stability: there are no sudden changes in temperature. It can be said that the temperature is almost the same throughout the year. There are only two seasons: the rainy season and the dry season. What we could call the part @(north of the State of Piauí) “whose climate is dry and debilitating, with heat in the summer, although the nights are cooled by the ocean winds, which barely rise above @(Teresina) is limited between @(Parnaíba) and @Poti), the southeast, where the climate of the region of @(São Francisco) predominates, hot with cool nights only from May to August, is limited by the Poti and the watershed of the @(Piauí and Gurguéa rivers); and finally the southwest, comprising the rest of the State, is where the climate is milder, with the appearance of regular winters and, caused by the altitude, the sensation of cold is already experienced at night, in the summer”.
@(Parnaíba) and @(Teresina) have an average annual temperature of 26º, 8º and 28º. In @(Parnaíba) the maximum and minimum temperatures have been recorded as 39º and 20º. In 1882, the first meteorological observations were made in @(Piauí), directed by &(engineer Benjamin Franklin de Albuquerque Lima), and the table in the Historical Chronology of the State of Piauí, by &(Pereira da Costa), shows the correlation of the averages obtained. On this date, 1048 observations were made. The insolation reached 48ºC.


III. THE PIAUIENSE HOUSE


Before we get into the analysis of the architecture of Piauí, we want to say that we visited @(the north and southeast of the state), where the sun is scorching; where the hammock has a reason to be; where the climate is hot, dry and debilitating. From @(Teresina) we went to @(Amarração) and @(Oeiras), on round trips, passing through @(Livramento), @(Campo Maior), @(Peri-Peri), @(Piracuruca), @(Buriti dos Lopes) and @(Parnaíba), to the north; @(Natal), @(Baixão), @(Ipiranga), @(Barro Duro), @(Coroatá), @(Valença), to the south.
We were not able to travel through the southwest of the state, which is so familiar to &(Agenor Augusto de Miranda). Given the information he so clearly provides us, it will not be surprising if our conclusions apply to this part of the Piauí territory. It is quite likely that, at least in part, the architectural expression of this area is different: just as the climate is different.
Could the architecture of the North and Southeast have influenced that of the Southwest? We don't know.
In the regions we were able to observe, the layout of the house in Piauí is systematized. It is the “entire dwelling” of @ (Maranhão), adapted to the demands and resources of Piauí. In general, the houses are one-story; it is rare to find two-story or three-story ones. The architecture is purely popular. The layout originates from the Maranhão “door and window” type, which evolved into the “half dwelling” and “entire dwelling” types. The layout is generally L-shaped; sometimes U-shaped. The superimposition of the “entire dwelling” layout gave rise to the tiled townhouses of São Luís, whose rear facades are entirely made of wood. The “entire dwelling”, spread out, is the house of Piauí: larger rooms, thicker walls: everything rises and falls. The “entire dwelling” in Maranhão is vertical; in Piauí — horizontal.
The “door and window” type comprises: a living room; a dependent bedroom, an obligatory passage to the balcony; the balcony; and the kitchen, in a small “extension”, forming part of the balcony. Sometimes, in even more modest buildings, the stove and the indispensable clay oven are located on the balcony itself. Here, the fact that it is an obligatory passage is justified. The balcony was the house to live in, where everything was done, even taking a nap. The woman lived in the bedroom, on the balcony and in the kitchen. Strangers did not go beyond the living room, whose purpose was to receive guests.
The “half-house” type is characterized by the independence of the bedroom and the living room and, consequently, by the greater length of the balcony. At one end of the building there is a corridor. The living room has a door to the corridor, and the bedroom to the balcony.
[196]
The private part of the building is still characteristic, as the dividing wall between the living room and the bedroom extends across the hallway, where there is a door with a flag. The flag and the door leaves are ornate, beautifully laced, and made of wood. These decorative elements are the most refined in the house. The front door is not as valuable; it is the family porch. Sometimes, above the door, there is a message greeting the visitor: Welcome to this house; or an invocation: God be in this house. Externally, the building has an entrance door to the hallway and two windows in the living room.
The “entire house” is part of the central corridor and the bedroom and living room are repeated on both sides, with the same layout described above. The balcony increases considerably in length. The new room is sometimes a guest room. The balcony is always wide; it is the dining room to the south, it is the living room. When there is a need for a larger number of rooms, the “extension” is extended and they are distributed there, the kitchen moves back and the “corridor” appears, a circulation element connected to the balcony. At the end, the corridor widens to once again create the kitchen, which is the part of the balcony that was moved back. It is the same exterior appearance, of the kitchen, corridor and balcony. As the number of rooms increases, a new “extension” appears on the opposite side, with another corridor: — it is the U-shaped plan.
In Maranhão, balconies are labeled because the rains are more constant and the climate is milder, although the heat is still noticeable. In Piauí, where the climate is hot and subject to little rain, balconies are systematically open. Since the sun is scorching, the height of the balcony is significantly reduced; and, often, the lowest part of the roof is 1.60 meters high. In addition, the people of Piauí are forced to plant trees on their land, along the entire balcony and walkway. They are forced to create as much shade as possible. The balconies and the rooms that have direct communication with them are the best and most pleasant rooms in the house in Piauí.
The climate conditions of @(Maranhão) impose labeled balconies, with their wooden walls and high-to-high shutters.
[197]
sketches
[198]
low, thus creating the differential ventilation system. The balconies of @(Piauí) have a full railing; the rest is completely open. All the internal doors are high, with completely open panels. There are some doors that have their leaves padded only on the upper part. The lower padding is replaced by blinds. The privacy of the rooms is thus assured and ventilation is resolved in a better way.
In fact, the problem of ventilation is the main concern here: large rooms; internal walls only half-height; ceilings in bedrooms and living rooms quite high; ridges easily reaching 8 to 10 meters; and roofing made of hollow tiles. When finishing is done, ceilings are installed, flat or in bowls, they are half-open, with slats, forming the most varied geometric designs and arranged in panels enhanced by the light, which creates color contrasts where the painting is monochromatic and of a single tone.
Nowadays, some houses have shingle ceilings, usually painted blue and white. However, the rooms in which they are installed become unbearable, due to the heat. Dr. Américo Celestino de Sá, in Teresina, assured us that the ambient temperature in these rooms is 2ºC higher.
The woodwork is made of natural carnauba trunks; the lath is made of the same material. @(Piauí) does not use scissors. The only tile used is the channel tile.
The people, with their spontaneous wisdom, without realizing it, classify what is most characteristic and peculiar to them. In @ (Maranhão) “morada” is the popular name for a dwelling. In @ (Piauí), with good reason, it is by the shape of the roof that the people classify the building. The Piauí roof is the most curious and most noticeable constructive-decorative element. Due to its shape, the play, and the distribution of its waters, the combination of the waters with the walls, and the manner in which it is executed, it is astonishingly pleasant. The roof that drops from 10 to 2 m, which adapts to all requirements and makes the balcony so welcoming, is what gives the buildings their name: “beira-e-bica” and “meia-água” or “meiagua” as the people of Teresina pronounce it.
[199]
Figure 2 — Balcony of @(S. Domingos Farm) @(Livramento)
Figure 3 — Balcony of @(Abelheiras Farm) @(Campo Maior)
[201]
Figure 4 — Interior of the house at @(Fazenda do Garrote). Half-timbered walls, carnauba woodwork and hollow tiles.
Figure 5 — Balcony. Carnauba woodwork and hollow tile. @(Teresina)
[203]
Figure 6 — Roof types
[205]
The “edge and spout” is the most common construction, the one whose roof has several slopes, each directed to a different side of the building. Mainly those that have the water from the roofs facing the outside. All houses have eaves, without exception. The #sertanejo’s spout is the eaves. The water is so valuable that they even use rainwater for drinking. The #sertanejo has their own system for collecting rainwater. Along the eaves, they place rustic gutters, which are directed to the well, or [Figure 7 — “edge and spout” type] to several pots where they will pour the water that falls on the roof. These pots are covered with wooden cloths to contain any residue brought by the water. The #sertanejo discards the water from the first wash of the roof. As the pots fill up, they are replaced with others. The #sertanejo, taking advantage of the eaves, makes a small spout from each conduit of the canal tile roof. But the truth is that the eaves, so widespread in @(Brazil), only inspired the expression “beira e bica” in #sertão.
[206]
We asked several people about the origin of this expression, which is old and current; they were unable to explain it to us. However, after finding the hydraulic system of the #sertanejo, we learned where the term “beira-e-bica” comes from.
“Half-pitched” is a house with a roof that slopes only to one side, usually backwards. The walls of the façades are protected by a series of tiles facing outwards. The expression is known and consecrated throughout Brazil and since we are talking about it, it will not be idle to note that among us, there are roofs with two, three, four and more slopes; but only the roof with a single slope is called “half-pitched”.
The roof in @(Piauí) is a lying roof. It is like a hammock: it accommodates all bodies.
The floors are covered indistinctly with baked clay tiles. The flooring in the hallway, living rooms, bedrooms, hallway and kitchen is the same. This covering is cooler and therefore more appropriate for the environment.
The toilet compartment was always located outside the main house, isolated, at the back of the property. More recently, in cities with sewage systems, the cesspit was incorporated into the “extension”.
In the kitchens there are always two clay ovens; one large and the other small, raised to about 0.80 m; the stove is made up of a large iron plate with several burners, resting on two parallel walls. Next to the stove and the ovens, there are large, wide masonry bases, where the battalions of pots, clay and stone pans are formed.
The simple or series pestle is another indispensable ornament in these kitchens, which are quite spacious and open.
The walls are almost always made of rammed earth, formed with carnauba trunks, arranged in the manner described by @(Mr. Isaías Pereira), in relation to the @(national farms), mentioned above, as we were able to verify in several places we passed through, both in the north and southeast of the State. From within the dividing walls, carnauba trunks can sometimes be seen emerging, which provide support for the ridgepoles, when these are of a more notable length.
[207]
Carnauba was the largest and most widely used building material in Piauí. Until recently, it was possible to say that construction in Piauí was carried out with carnauba. The carnauba palms were worth little, and their wealth was unknown, and today it is one of the largest sources of income for the state.
The carnauba trunk, measuring 30 to 40 centimeters in diameter, and used naturally, gives us rammed earth walls, sometimes half a meter thick, or more.
We also found stone walls, although they are not common: they are river slabs, river stones, and “cabeca de jacaré” (a natural conglomerate of tabatinga and small stones, smaller than gravel No. 0, highly resistant, with a bright and beautiful reddish-purple color). The “river stone” sandstone, as it is called, occurs in various colors: white, yellow, green, blue and red. These are stones that are found loose on the ground, blocks of different sizes; they are picked up and laid, as they do not require major repairs.
Figure 8 - “Half-water” type.
[208]
In several cities, we found some houses with exposed wall material, without cladding.
In Campo Maior we saw a house built with an “alligator head” with the jambs and corner pillars made of river slabs, which is a more resistant material. The contrast of colors and materials obtained in this house is a precious document of the design that can be obtained from such rich elements. However, bricks are now being used there in modern times.
In the lands around @(Teresina), there are small pebbles in large quantities and of various colors. We saw sidewalks made of this material in some gardens of private homes, forming various geometric designs, playing only with their colors and size. The ornamental effect is pleasant and it is a shame that its use is not widespread.
The ogival shape and its variations, of the door and window openings, are the constructive-decorative elements that draw attention to those who jump in @(Teresina). Most of the houses adopt this element, which is spread throughout the state, but which has become consecrated in @(Teresina).
The ogive is found in almost all the @(Northern states), but in none of them did it take hold. There are few buildings of this kind. In the @(Federal District) we know of an example that appeared sporadically in our midst: it is the @(house on Frei Caneca Street), formerly belonging to &(Councillor Zacarias Góis e Vasconcelos), who was president of the @(Province of Piauí) from §(1845) to §(1847). We have no doubt in affirming that it must have been a memory of Piauí that Counsellor Zacarias wanted to preserve.
The architect &(Luís Saia), from the &(Culture Department of the City Hall) of the city of São Paulo, with whom we had already been in Teresina, informed us that in @(Caxias), in @(Maranhão), he saw extensive application of the warhead.
We believe that it entered @(Piauí) in the second quarter of the last century. In Oeiras there are few manifestations and, for the @(north of the State), the application of the warhead is gradually decreasing, to the point that @(Parnaíba) also has few examples. @(São Luís do Maranhão) is in the same case.
[209]
From what &(Saia) told us, it is believed that @(Caxias) was the radiating core of the warhead element.
It is likely that he went to @(Oeiras) shortly before 1849, the date on which &(José Antônio Saraiva) went to @(Chapada do Corisco) to found @(Teresina) “leaving everything well-planned, the construction of the building immediately in order of street layout, and following a well-combined plan”.
Figure 9 - “Edge and spout” type with application of ogive.
The truth is that in @(Teresina), the warhead became a common element. The city was new and the warhead was a novelty.
However, what interests us is not history, but rather the observation that the ogive was applied there intelligently. Since the ceilings of the buildings are quite high, as we have already said, this element came to facilitate the ventilation of the rooms. Its shape allows it to reach great heights. The part of the ogive itself, the triangle, is always furnished with shutters that are repeated in the
[210]
lower part of the frames. The ventilation of the house was increased and it remained as before: closed and protected from the sun's rays.
Completing the information we have been gathering about houses in Piauí, in the cities, we have the walls of adobe and masonry, all of them high, aligned with the buildings; protected by the tiled eaves, sometimes rising to make room for a service door, but almost always supporting the roof, which extends its eaves over the wall and along its entire length.
The few tiled buildings and the few two-story houses that can be found in @(Piauí) are examples brought from far away: from the south, and in their surroundings they do not offer much interest for the study we are doing. Some of them, however, are notable, such as: the @(Grupo Escolar Costa Alvarenga) and the old @(Residence of Conselheiros Zacarias), both in @(Oeiras), buildings from the first half of the last century.
The few mansions in Piauí are stately; the unparalleled mansions in São Luís clearly correspond to a mixed program: commercial and residential. In Piauí, the mansions we are talking about were the residences of state administrators; in Maranhão, they were the residences of major merchants. In Maranhão, the plan of the “entire house” is superimposed: the central corridor widens, creating the vestibule, a circulation hub with an intimate-collective character, with the staircase that sometimes goes above the general roof, creating the lookouts that Professor Rubem Almeida says were built for signaling. “According to the code of signals, semaphores for the day, chromatic for the night, the major merchants, their owners, entered into open communication with the ships long before they approached the port, about high or low prices, whether for goods arriving or departing, among which cotton was the most important.” &(Aluízio Azevedo) says that the store employees slept in these viewpoints. Both may be right. The first because he is a great connoisseur of @(Maranhão); the second the portrait artist
[211]
of the social life of their land. For us, the viewpoint solves lighting and ventilation problems in the central part of the house. The rest is useable.
The ground floor of these townhouses is made up of commercial stores, the lobby and large warehouses. On the upper floors, around the staircase, the “entire home” with all its features, plus a rich program.
Figure 10 - Imburana stools and chair with tanned cowhide seats.
In @(Piauí), the program is different, as we have already said: on the ground floor, there are secondary accommodations for servants and the vestibule where the intimacy begins; the staircase is placed right in front of the house, lit directly from the facade. There is no need for a lookout. In @(Piauí), these buildings are located on large plots of land, while in @(Maranhão), the two-story houses are served by internal areas. In @(Piauí), the two-story houses are isolated; in @(Maranhão), they are adjacent to others. In @(Piauí), everything inside the plot belongs to its owner; in @(Maranhão), the well served two or more houses.
[212]
because it was opened at the point where the boundaries of the lands of different owners met.
Large farmhouses follow the same program, expanded, because they are larger. Note the appearance of a front porch, connected to the back porch by a hallway. Sometimes the rooms are served by both porches. The new porch serves as protection from the sun and as a place for travelers to rest. Many farms have special porches for travelers who, upon arrival, simply hang their hammocks on the racks or use ropes to hang them from the carnauba tree trunks, placed parallel to each other, high up, supported by the walls. The ropes wrap around the carnauba tree trunks and the handles of the hammocks.
As for furniture, we saw wooden tables and benches; some with backrests. Stools and chairs with leather seats and backrests; rawhide suitcases; billiards, pots and hammocks. We rarely found beds, a piece of furniture that the people of Piauí rarely use and that is quite unpleasant there, such is the heat that it concentrates. The hammock is where people sleep well. On some farms and homes, we found tables made of river slabs: large slabs of stone that come loose from their beds. They are slabs of regular thickness, and are supported, at the four corners, by pieces of carnauba tree trunk; polished from so much use. The largest one we saw was in @(Campo Maior), on @(Garrote farm): it was 1.00 x 1.73 m.
The most ornate objects, the most carefully crafted and sometimes exquisitely finished, are the jars, pots and nets. The nets are made of cloth, cotton or linen; or woven with tucum or croá fiber, carnauba or any other fiber. The fabrics are very varied, from fine and tightly woven to thick and open. The balconies of the nets are made with taste; this is where the craftsman uses his greatest ingenuity and imagination. The nets and the riggers are scattered throughout the house. The jars and pots or clay jugs are the ornaments of the balconies, where there are a large number of examples, varying in shape and size, placed in series. They are beautiful and quite ornamental pieces. The simplest jars are benches, with the seat perforated from space to space so that the water can be placed in the holes.
[213]
Figure 11 - Billiards. Height: 1.36
[215]
Full jugs that, when continually exposed to the air, make the water quite cool. The jug is complemented by a small gourd with a wooden handle. In the past, in wealthy homes, there were gourds made of worked silver. They were used to collect water from the pot and deposit it in jugs or glasses. It is natural that the people of Piauí have a special fondness for hammocks, pots and jugs. They live in an environment where the heat is scorching and the scarcity of water is notorious. They find comfort in naps and full jugs. The jugs in the houses and the “springs” in the cities are treated with special care.
Leather chairs and stools are a result of the environment. Civilization in @(Piauí) originated on @(livestock farms). It is the leather civilization. The carnauba tree provided the trunk for building the house; the cattle provided the leather for the furniture and for the cowboy's complete outfit.
In the backlands and on the outskirts of cities, there are straw houses or huts and mud houses or “tapona”, covered with straw or tiles. Sometimes, the “taponas” covered with straw have tiled eaves and are whitewashed. The construction resources are the same, already well known. The raw materials are carnauba and buriti. We only emphasize that the layout of the house already described often influences the hut. It is difficult to find a hut without a porch or a corridor; they are quite closed and protection from the sun continues to be a top concern. In the backlands, the ranch is placed next to the porch, and the traveler may only enter the porch when invited: which always happens when the husband is at home, and which never happens when the wife is alone. The entrance to the porch is always blocked; closed with carnauba trunks, reinforced vertically or overlapped horizontally. This closure makes the porch intimate and protects against the entry of animals. Travelers are always welcomed. Sometimes the dividing walls, doors and windows of these huts are made from the stem of the buriti palm leaf.
In places where there is no buriti palm tree, I have seen the use of the stem of its leaf. @(Agenor de Miranda) says that “nature is so good in this land that the buriti palm tree, abundant in @(alto Parnaíba), gives the stem of its leaf with which rafts are made that reach
[216]
to transport many tons of cargo downhill, with the greatest possible safety. This process was used by the Indians and is still very much in vogue today because it is convenient and cheap. In the United States, these rafts, naturally made of another material, are called “rafts”. The economy of this means of transport is also evident because, once made, the raft is dismantled and the stems sold for fencing, which lasts three to four years, when well made.
When the #sertanejo has a farm, it is almost always fenced. The most common fence is the one made of bushes or tree branches, braided together, or we can say: entangled.
There are fences made of buriti and carnauba. The arrangement of the carnauba trunk to form the fence varies, and this creates notes of light and dark and of fullness and emptiness.
The buriti fence is made by joining stem to stem. The shape of the cross-section of the buriti leaf stem is similar to an isosceles triangle. The edge of the dihedral formed by the approximately equal sides of one stem is joined to the base of another stem, and so on, creating a striated, ornamental surface. To maintain the position of the various stems, they are drilled in several places, where slats or battens made from the buriti leaf stem itself are inserted transversely. The stems can be placed upright or lying down. For the security of the fences, from space to space, varying with the length of the strips, carnauba trunks or buriti leaf stems are placed as supports on either side of the fence.
Despite all the concerns, the pressure of the wind on the fence panels and the ease with which animals can lean against them cause the fences to lean over time and lose their plumb line.
To avoid this inconvenience, the #backwoodsman created the triangulated fence, with re-entrant and protruding angles. The wind slides more easily and the pressure becomes less; the animal does not have as much ease of leaning. The large cloth is subdivided into plots whose
[217]
Figure 12 - Leggings, doublet, chest guard and leather hat. In the background, a triangular cleaning fence. @(Ininga Farm) @(Livramento)
[219]
Figure 13 - #sertanejo house
Figure 14 - Carnauba fence
[221]
length varies according to the measurements of the cleaning or the stem or trunk, depending on the material applied.
When the farm is next to the road, the house is placed close to the fence, on the inside. The fence, at any distance from the house, changes direction looking for the closest corners. The “terrace” appears, the road is widened, a small square is created where the ranch is built or replaced by two leafy trees. The shade is guaranteed, the landing is assured and the farm is protected.
The #sertanejo furniture consists of benches, rustic tables, hammocks and pots. Most of the time, the gourd replaces the pot.


IV. RELIGIOUS ARCHITECTURE


From the point of view from which we are conducting our study, the religious architecture in @(Piauí) demonstrates once again the influence of Maranhão. The churches of @(Maranhão) and @(Piauí) are poor and do not allow for a parallel with the other churches in @(Brazil).
&(Francisco Dias de Ávila), first lord of the @(house of the Garcia D'Ávila Tower), of @(Bahia); &(Domingos Afonso Mafrense), knowledgeable about @(Bahia) and @(Pernambuco); &(Domingos Jorge Velho), coming from São Paulo, and his companions were all absorbed by the current of @(Sergeant-major Baltazar Alves Pestana).
In @(Piauí), the Jesuits were much more farm administrators and cattle breeders than the priests.
There are no traces of Jesuit churches there.
The royal charter of §(1716) ordered that 'when the people are present, you determine the most suitable place to serve as a square for each of the said towns, erecting a pillory in the middle of them, assigning an area to build a church, capable of receiving a suitable number of parishioners, when the town increases, as well as other suitable areas for houses of recreation and audiences, jails, and other public workshops, having the houses outlined
[222]
of the residents in a straight line, so that the streets would be wide and straight'. Everything was done according to the royal order except churches. The villages were immediately elevated to towns, whose plans were organized with wide and straight streets, squares, houses always “made in the same uniform shape on the outside”. The people went further: they maintained unity in the layout of the houses, although the royal charter allowed for variety: “although in the other lower part each person makes them as he sees fit”.
The royal charter was only disobeyed in the part referring to churches “capable of receiving a competent number of parishioners, when the towns grew”.
Not all cities have churches in the full sense of the term. They are inexpressive chapels, without artistic value and cramped. The towns have only grown and the cities are still large. Only the chapels have become small.
We partially make an exception for the @(matrices of NS das Vitórias de Oeiras), from 1733, and that of @(NS do Carmo de Piracuruca), from §(1743). The first appeared seventeen years after the royal charter and the second, twenty years later.
The @(churches of Piracuruca and Oeiras) are sporadic examples, brought from abroad. Even in terms of their construction system, they correspond to the general program of our modest churches. They are large and poor. They have already undergone modifications and additions that are easy to correct. They are commissioned churches; not designed by the people.
@(Pereira da Costa) says that the “foundation of the @(Main Church of Our Lady of Mount Carmel), and the immediate construction of the town that surrounds it, is linked to a fact that is narrated as follows: “@(Manuel Dantas Correia) and his brother @(José Dantas Correia), both Portuguese and quite rich, undertaking an exploration trip to the interior of @(Piauí) at the beginning of the 18th century, were taken prisoner by the Indians who inhabited it, and recognizing the fate that awaited them, they made a vow to Our Lady of Mount Carmel to build her a sumptuous temple in the place where they were imprisoned if she freed them from the hands of the indigenous barbarians”.
[223]
V. FUNERAL ARCHITECTURE


There is little we can say about the funerary architecture. Without any justification, the old tombs in the cemeteries and those that existed in the churches were almost all broken and today only a few of them remain. We visited the cemeteries of @(Parnaíba), @(Campo Maior), @(Valença) and @(Oeiras). The one in @(Parnaíba) is of no interest; it only contains the common little marble tombs.
The others were formed in a square. In the center of one side, the entrance gate and corresponding to this on the opposite side, a small chapel. The entire area is surrounded by thick walls, covered with tiles, where the columbaria are located. When the cemetery is full, a new block is added to the front, the old gate is brought to the new wall that borders it, and the original entrance is left completely open, connecting the first block with the second block. If a third block is needed, as in the case of @(Valença), the cemetery is pulled back, opening two small passages next to the chapel. It is always aligned with the back wall of the first block. The graves are low, whitewashed and covered with river slabs; simple and attractive.
Cemeteries in the backlands, on the side of the roads, grow naturally. Others appear around the first grave. A simple cross designates a grave. To prevent animals from damaging the mound of earth or the cross, the graves are cleaned up.
We found some of these graves covered by small huts: four pillars supporting a gabled roof, made of straw or tiles, as is the case in the @(Battalion cemetery), where the brave men who died in the battle of Genipapo, for the Independence of Brazil, are buried.



