[74]


Scientific trip through the North of @(Bahia), southwest of @(Pernambuco), south of @(Piauí) and from north to south of @(Goiás)
by the
Drs. &(Arthur Neiva) and &(Belisario Penna)
(Studies carried out at the request of the &(Inspectorate of Works against drought). Direction: Dr. &(Arrojado Lisboa)


The travel notes transcribed below refer to research into medicine, hygiene and natural history carried out in §(1912) in one of the areas of Brazil affected by drought. The regions covered are included in the states of @(Bahia), @(Piauí) and @(Goiás).


Climate


In excursions of this nature, the data on this subject are certainly deficient and, except in @(Juazeiro), where there is a small meteorological station belonging to @(Horto Florestal), which the &(Inspectorate of Works against Droughts) has there, we were able to gather little information that would enlighten us regarding the climatology of the area we visited. Even in @(Juazeiro), the data concerning humidity, evaporation, cloudiness, etc., were not recorded and the daily temperature record showed gaps of days and even months: however, since they are the most complete data and those that cover the longest period of time, we will reproduce them, citing only the monthly maximums and minimums.


1911
	

	Maximum
	Minimum
	August
	36th
	20th
	September
	38.5º
	15th
	October
	38th
	18.8º
	November
	39th
	19th
	December
	37.8º
	18.2º
	1911
	January
	39.2º
	18.5º
	February
	?
	18th
	March
	36th
	20th
	

In §(November 1911) there was a day when the temperature reached 39º and in §(January 1912) the temperature reached 39.2º, the maximum observed for that city. The minimum recorded was 15º in September. This data, although incomplete, gives an idea of the temperature on the banks of the @(São Francisco), in a large area of the states of @(Bahia) and @(Pernambuco); practically, the meteorological data collected in @(Juazeiro), can be applied to the city of @(Petrolina) in Pernambuco.
[75]
which borders it. @(Juazeiro) is located at an altitude of 372 meters.
From §(April) to §(September), we made observations three times a day, at 6, 12 and 18 hours, when we landed; the night temperatures were recorded using a RUTHERFORD type maximum and minimum thermometer. During the trip, only the night temperature was taken accurately, and only the minimums were well recorded, since, without exception on one day, the night temperature was well observed. The averages obtained, although not perfectly accurate, since in all months there were errors in recording the maximum temperatures, must nevertheless not be far from the truth. The data on cloud cover were taken with the utmost accuracy possible. There is undoubtedly an essential error in combining results obtained in the morning in a certain place with others taken the following morning at a point far away and where the weather conditions are no longer identical.
In §(April) the average was 26º; the minimum reached 14º, in @(São José da Canastra), a town in the municipality of @(Remanso) in Bahia and located at an altitude of about 500 meters; the maximum of 36º was recorded in @(Coité) 3 kilometers from @(Petrolina). Cloud cover = 3. During the night of the 15th it rained little; the following day it rained heavily at night; on day §(30) in a place called @(Onça), municipality of @(São Raimundo Nonato), we recorded a quick downpour that the locals call “fog”.
In §(May), the average dropped 24.4º, the maximum reached 32º on days §(13, 25 and 30); the minimum was 19, observed at 23 in the place called @(Caracol). These observations refer mainly to the locations of the municipality of @(São Raimundo Nonato), where according to information provided by &(Colonel Manoel Antunes de Macedo Junior), in his @(Tanque farm), the annual maximum reaches 36º.
The average cloud cover increased, reaching 6.8. It only rained on the 29th.
These data also include observations recorded in some locations belonging to the municipalities of @(Remanso), @(Riacho da Casa Nova) and @(Santa Rita do Rio Preto) in the State of @(Bahia).
During the month of §(June) the average was exactly the same as the previous month, 24.4º; the absolute minimum reached 11º at @(pouso “Ipuêras”) on the 9th; in @(vila Parnaguá) we recorded the absolute maximum of 30º: on the 11th and 16th it rained heavily, a very rare phenomenon at this time of year, according to the information obtained. According to the information provided by &(Judge of Law), the maximum temperature observed to date in @(vila de Parnaguá) was 37º.
Average cloudiness: 6.8.
In the month of July, observations include the municipalities of @(Parnaguá), @(Corrente) @(Piauí), @(Santa Rita) @(Bahia) and @(Duro) @(Goiás). It is the month with the lowest average, easily explained not only by the time of year, but also by the altitude, which is getting higher every day, as we were heading towards the headwaters of the @(Rio Preto) in search of the divortium aquarum of the @(São Francisco) and @(Tocantins) basins; the average observed was 20º, the maximum was 31º on the 4th, near the @(vila de Parnaguá); the absolute minimum was 7.5º recorded in the Bahian town of @(Perypery), municipality of @(Santa Rita do Rio Preto), @(Bahia). From the 5th to the 29th, the absolute minimum temperature varied between 7.5º and 12º: this temperature was observed in locations in the municipality of @(Santa Rita), state of @(Bahia) and in the “gerals” (extensive and uninhabited fields) of the same state that extend from the confluence of the @(Rio Sapão) in the @(Rio Preto), to the large plateau located approximately 850 meters above sea level and located near @(Goiás). The aforementioned gerais, which evidently enjoy an excellent climate, are formed by magnificent lands that are completely unused, as they are completely uninhabited and still today are in the same conditions described by &(GARDNER), 80 years ago.
Due to the frequent fires at this time of year, we stopped taking observations concerning cloud cover from this month onwards.
The last days of §(July) were spent in @(Goiás) and soon after crossing the @(Serra do Duro),
[76]
the traveler feels that the heat increases.
In August the average temperature is 25º, the minimum does not go beyond 14.5º; on the other hand, the maximum reaches 34º. The observations made by &(Dr. FRANCISCO AYRES da SILVA) in the city of @(Porto Nacional) during 10 months of the year 1901 record the following maximum temperatures for each month:


January
	33rd
	February
	32nd
	March
	32nd
	April
	33rd
	May
	32nd
	June
	32nd
	July
	34th
	August
	35.5º
	September
	36th
	October
	34th
	

36º continues to be the highest temperature observed in that city in Goiás. In @(Goiás), it usually rains from September or October to December; from this month onwards, i.e., for a period of about 20 days, there is an interruption that is said to be never lacking and is known as the “January dry spell”; after this period, it rains heavily until March. In July or August, there are showers known as the “cashew rain”. In those areas, there are only two seasons in the year, the “dry” season that lasts from May to September and the “green” season from October to April; the terms summer and winter are more rarely used; sometimes the dry season lasts from May to December and even January, when the first rain falls; in favorable years it starts to rain at the end of September. This is what normally happens: periodically, however, the rain stops falling and the drought sets in with its classic trail of horrors.
The prevailing wind in the area we traveled was always from the east or southeast; during the days we spent in @(Parnaguá) this was the prevailing wind from June 12th to July 2nd.
The drought marches from east to west. The path we were taking took us in this direction, which allowed us to observe the phenomenon, because, since there was already complete drought in the eastern areas, as we advanced, we were surprised by the rest of the “green”; When we arrived at @(Parnaguá), after crossing areas that were already completely dry, we still found this municipality at the end of the “green”; when we left, the drought there was already complete, however, much further on, we still reached areas where the drought was just beginning. The verification was easy to do, because we always took as reference two plants that are very common throughout the area and belong to the genus Croton (quince) and the other is the mata pasto (Cassia) and which completely lose their leaves.
In some places in @(Goiás), frosts fall and we have received various reports about this and we were even able to observe its effects on some banana trees. In the capital of this state, we had the opportunity to witness intense hailstorms of short duration, however.


Decrease in water levels
There is no doubt that the water level is always decreasing in @(Central Brazil); residents on the banks of large rivers do not notice the phenomenon, but the testimony of residents living near small rivers and small water bodies is unanimous in confirming this fact.
From Petrolina to the village of Parnaguá, there is not a single perennial course; the Piauí River is “cut” (with its course interrupted) in the village of São Raimundo Nonato; the Curimatá River is completely dry; just to mention the largest ones. The large body of water formed by the Parnaguá Lagoon is seriously threatened, having shrunk by about 3 kilometers, and if the Fundo River were to flow into it again, the drying up would be accelerated; this watercourse was the main cause of the filling in of the lagoon; a few years ago the river changed course and the lagoon is currently crossed by the Parahim River, which carries a large amount of mud; the Missão, Ibiraba, Ipuêra and Jatobá lagoons have sometimes dried up in large areas.
[77]
droughts. After the @(S. Francisco), the first running river we found was the @(Parahim) which, according to the information, was “cut” further ahead. When we crossed the @(Rio Corrente), which flows into the @(Parahim), we learned that during the drought of §(1898) its course had been interrupted and we crossed it in a place where it was 5 meters wide and only 30 centimeters deep. This is, in fact, a river referred to as having a perennial course.
Where, however, information is most abundant is in @(Goiás); the abundance of watercourses in this state is proverbial. However, it is common knowledge that the water level is gradually but incessantly decreasing; any former resident, who is asked about the subject, will soon tell you about the marshes that existed in the vicinity and have now disappeared, and the streams that did not previously “cut” the rivers such as the @(Canabrava) and the @(Santa Thereza) that are now beginning to “cut”. Any resident who has lived for 20 years in any area of Goiás will be able to tell you how many buriti palm groves have disappeared in this space of time (the presence of groups of buriti palms (Mauritia vinifera MART.) is considered an indication of the existence of water). In many villages in Goiás, the scarcity of water is truly notable; in @(Almas) gold mining could not go ahead due to the lack of this element; In @(Descoberto), the area is so dry that it is necessary to open large and deep wells in search of water, just as they do in areas considered dry; the @(Red River) itself, which bathes the @(Capital of Goiás), used to provide access to large vessels.
Furthermore, throughout the area, man tries to speed up the formation of the desert by all means possible through the criminal and stupid destruction of vegetation.
From @(Alagoinhas) @(Bahia) onwards, the area is evidently semi-arid and extremely turbulent, destroying the little vegetation that exists; the main culprits here are the &(E. de FS Francisco and the Companhia Viação Fluvial); the first has 4 large firewood depots that consume 500 cubic meters of firewood each, monthly; in addition to these, there are other smaller depots. According to the new contract, the road is only required to burn coal up to @(Aramaty), at kilometer 120; the road, however, is 575 kilometers long until @(Joazeiro)! The &(companhia de navegação fluvial) only uses firewood as fuel. The charcoal used in the city of @(Bahia) still comes, in large part, from the area in question; it is easy to suppose the consequences of such devastation added to those caused by the fires, which began in §(October). Only those who have traveled through the @(campinas of Bahia and Goiás) during this period can imagine the scale of the fires. In the areas located in the valleys, the smoke accumulates for months, until they are swept away by the rains; the almost total absence of birds that nest on the ground and are destroyed is desolate; there are hundreds of kilometers of sparsely inhabited areas, where, however, animal life is scarcely represented, due to the action of the fire. Even in the “general” areas only traveled from time to time, the traveler sets fire to prepare better pasture for the caravans that follow him, because the “wild” lands, after being burned, serve as better food for the animals when they reappear.
This is not always true, because we know from experience the difficulties we had to overcome in order to feed the “troops” who were victims of such solicitude, which completely destroyed pastures that were perhaps still usable. However, good intentions are rarely defended; in general, the fire is set off almost simultaneously in mid-October and spreads over immense areas until some watercourse or buriti palm grove stops it; especially in @(Goiás), the fires reach incredible proportions.
Without exception, throughout the area, crops are planted in so-called coivaras; that is, a portion of forest destroyed by fire, where a few liters of corn and beans are sown.
The semi-arid area of @(Brazil) will necessarily have to increase gradually; in those areas only some corn, beans and in the "low season" tobacco and sugar cane are planted; certainly
[78]
This little will not replace the much that is quickly done, destroying the naturally stunted vegetation that protected the scarce water in those areas.
In the Historia naturalis Brasilae by &(PISO and MARCGRAVIUS) there are references to the large quantity of plants in dry regions, and on page 262 of the 1648 edition there are allusions to dry rivers, in contrast with the “Flumen unicum nobile est in hisce regionibus, vulgo Rio S. Francisco” etc., which perhaps constitutes the first document alluding to the “drought”. &(MARTIUS) in the Tabulae physionomicae explicatae, occupies the entire chapter X with the “Silva Aestu Aphylla, quam dicunt Caa-tinga, in Provinciae Bahiensis deserto australi”; there we find sketches of the general appearance of the vegetation of the dry zone of @(Brazil). Practically nothing was done after the publication of the “Flora Brasiliensis”.
&(ULE) and &(LOEFGREN) have written several publications on the subject. In @(Juazeiro), we hired the @(Horto Florestal) equipped by &(LOEFGREN) for the study of local plants and gathered all the representatives of the cacti in a flowerbed, some of which are new species; we counted 18 species represented there, all scientifically determined. The dendritic genera were not present; in fact, in the entire dry zone, we only found between @(São Raimundo Nonato) and @(Remanso) one called “chichá”, probably belonging to the genus Phyllocactus LINK, and representatives of the genus Rhipsalis GAERT. in some places where there was still forest. Despite the research done on the vegetation of the dry zone, one immediately feels, simply by reading the authors who deal with it, that it is a field where much remains to be done and in the material already studied great confusion reigns, making a review indispensable. In the areas we visited, we did not find a single specimen of Cavanillesia RUIZ and PAR., registered as present by several authors. If we were allowed to describe the caatinga of Pernambuco and Piauí, we would state that the essential plant is undoubtedly the “faveleira” (a type of tree) determined by &(LOEFGREN) as Pachystroma acanthophylla. More than the imbuzeiro (Spondias tuberosa A. CAMARA), the imburana (Bursera letophoeos MART.), the joazeiro (Zizyphus joazeiro MART.) and the Pilocereus setosus GUERKE (xiquexique), the faveleira characterizes the caatinga.
The imburana tree goes as far as @(Goiás), the joazeiro and the imbuzeiro extend quite a bit to the West and North, the faveleira, however, ends just beyond @(São Raimundo Nonato). As soon as the horrible bramble of &(Martius) improves in appearance and the Mimosas decrease in number and the quince tree (Croton L.) becomes more abundant, the faveleira starts to diminish.
From @(Petrolina) to @(São Raimundo Nonato), the appearance of the vegetation is practically the same; everywhere Cereus catingicola GERKE and several species of Neoglaziovia MEZ., in addition to N. variegata ARRUDA CAMARA, and at least 4 species of the genus Bromelia - representatives of Opuntia MILL., Echinocactus LINK and OTTO, Melocactus LINK and OTTO; no dendritic bromeliaceae and only one specimen of orchidaceae were found, which seemed to belong to the genus Cyrtopodium R. BR. Everywhere the macambira (Bromelia laciniosa MART.), terrestrial bromeliaceae with stems, is extremely abundant and in certain places forms the “macambiral” of great use in droughts, since the rhizomes serve as food for men and animals. From time to time, the traveler's attention is drawn to the bright red color of the flowers of the “mulunga” (Erythrina L.) or to the curved, red pods of another smaller tree, the Pithecolobium diversifolium BENTH. The Ipomea fistulosa MART., so common on the banks of the @(São Francisco), disappears soon after @(Petrolina) to reappear only on the banks of the @(Parnaguá lagoon). Everywhere the quince tree (Croton L.), without being allied to the mold, as &(LOEFGREN) observed in @(Ceará), and the mata-pasto (Cassia sericea SWAR.) and other species of the same genus included under the same common name, sometimes occupying enormous areas. No specimen of palm tree;
[79]
the first ones observed were Copernicia cerifera MART. (carnauba tree) and this was at @(Fazenda da Cruz) in the vicinity of @(Vila de Parnaguá).
In some places on the banks of the São Francisco River and in the Piauí municipality of Parnaguá and even in Vila do Duro, Goiás, we found some Cocos nucifera L. trees. In the backlands, the “coconut tree of Bahia” did not find the conditions that favor its growth and fruiting as it does on the coast. The scarcity with which it is found is proof of this; furthermore, according to the information we gathered, the coconut trees there only begin to bear fruit after 7 years, and the specimen that grew in Vila do Duro only bore its first fruits after 11 years.
The vegetation is sparse; baraúna (Melanoxylon brauna, SCHOTT), joazeiro and umburana are the largest plant representatives up to the vicinity of @(São Raimundo Nonato) and never exceed 8 meters in height. Throughout the area, the terrains are designated by the appearance of the vegetation; thus, “tabuleiro” designates open and more or less flat terrain where low vegetation predominates; “agreste” and “mimoso” designate the terrain by the quality of the grass that grows; agreste (Eragrostis BEAUV.) is forage that cattle only use after it has been burned, with the animals feeding on the shoots; “mimoso” (Panicum capillaceum LANK.) is the forage best used by cattle without the action of fire.
A little further on from Petrolina, the caatinga trees are more developed than in the surroundings of Juazeiro, and in the place called “Caldeirão” Pernambuco, the thorn trees have diminished and the umburanas and juremas (Mimosas) have reached large proportions. At the time we crossed this area (April), everything was green; later we verified that only the cacti remain green and, if the drought continues, the “xique-xique becomes thinner,” as we were informed.
However, as the traveler approaches @(São Raimundo Nonato), the vegetation changes for the better and between this village and the city of @(Remanso) there is more robust vegetation; however, the umburana de cheiro or brava (Torresia cearensis FREIRE ALLEMÃO.) can grow to 3-span planks, competing with the Hymenaea courbaril L. (Jatobá), which clearly shows how little vegetation develops and how the size of the trees is far from the proportions reached in the south of the country. The angico (Piptadenia moniliformis BENTH.) and the aroeira (Astronium JACQ.) complete the large trees of the entire area until reaching the village of @(Parnaguá), where the same plant species assume larger proportions. In the surroundings of @(Parnaguá) there is another species of angico, Piptadenia biuncifera BENTH, which, in addition to other distinguishing characteristics, has a much larger pod. There, we find the only gigantic tree along the entire route, which is a specimen of a certain quality of gameleira, Urostigma gardnerianum MIQ. Among the large representatives, the tamboril (Enterolobium tamburil MART.) appears for the first time. In @(Parnaguá), the faveleira no longer exists and we could say with all truth, imitating the local saying, that the faveleira is the border between the caatinga and the agreste. The juremas were still blooming here on June 6th, however, they were already completely leafless from @(Caracol) to this village. Under the name jurema, the people group together at least 3 perfectly defined species; one with a pink flower and two others with white flowers of different sizes, in addition to the difference in the color of the bark. Maniçoba is abundant in the semi-arid zone of Bahia and Piauí, extending much further east than the favela, invading the "greste" and disappearing before reaching the "gerals" existing between São Marcelo and Duro. The species of the genus Manihot, rubber producers and commonly known as "maniçoba" and "maniçoba rasteira", until recently considered to be only a single species, Manihot glaziovi MUELL. ARG. described from Ceará, today amount to approximately 20 perfectly determined species. Very recently, E. ULE in a work entitled "Beitraege zur Kenntnis der brazilianischen Manihot-Arten"
[80]
published in Vol. 50, issue 5, no. 114, pp. 1-12 of &(ENGLER’s) “Botanische Jahrbuecher”, released in §(May 1914), the results of research carried out on material collected in @(Bahia) by Mr. &(L. ZEHNTER), where 11 new species and two new varieties were found, of which 6 species or varieties provide rubber.
After this work &(ULE) also published under the title “Die Kautschukpflanzen Suedamerikas” a work in the “Vegetationsbilder” by &(KARSTEN & SCHENCK) (cf. op. cit. 12. Reihe, Heft 6, Taf. 31-36, Jena, 1914), where interesting information about maniçoba and mangabeira can be found.
In the @(Parnaguá lagoon), Eichornia azurea KUNTH is quite abundant, but does not form large clumps, and in some places in the @(Ibiraba) we find Hedychium coronarium KOEN. In the municipality of @(Parnaguá) there is a famous “vereda” (a word whose meaning, according to our interpretation, indicates, in those parts, “fertile place with abundant vegetation”, “vereda do Curimatá”; do not imagine dense forests; far from it, it is a stretch of land of greater fertility, truly a patch of greenery formed by more lush and condensed vegetation. In this region the pastures are excellent and Andropogon rufus KTH., the jaraguá do Sul, but there called provisional, grows spontaneously.
Under the name of croatá-assú, the Fourcraea gigantea VENT. = Fourcroya SCHM.) is found in the dry region, but not abundantly, the amaryllidaceae currently spread throughout @(tropical America) and in some parts of the old world. This is the piteira or pita of the South of @(Brazil), a plant used everywhere for the extraction of fibers; in @(Mauritius) the fibers of this plant are known by the name of pitt or pitte, a probable corruption of the Brazilian expression.
In the @(northeast) region, &(DRUMMOND) also records F. agavephylla BROTERO as present, believing that it is synonymous with the species described on pp. 23-26 in the “Dissertation on plants that can give linen” by &(Arruda Camara), under the name Agave vivipara. The identification we made of croatá-assú with F. gigantea is only probable, since there is much confusion about the genus Fourcraea and many others that have representatives in @(Brazil). &(JR Drummond) published in the 18th Annual Report of the Missouri Botanical Garden pp. 25-75, Pl. 1-4, S. Louis, 1907, under the title “The Literature of Fourcraea with a synopsis of the known species”, an exhaustive work on the subject and where several questions concerning the species of the genus Fourcraea that occur in @(Brazil) are studied in detail and which those interested may consult, with great benefit, as well as the “Observations on Fourcraea” by &(W. Trelease) published in: Annales du &(Jardin Botanique de Buitenzorg), - 2nd Ser. Suppl. III - pp. 905 - 906, Taf. XXV - XLVIII, Leide, 1900.
In this work, the author, in addition to information about the piteira in @(Brazil) and which in some way contradicts the point of view of &(Drummond), since the “Caraguatáguaçú de PISO” is an evident Fourcraea for &(TRELEASE) and only pro parte for the other, brings new data for the study in question of the Brazilian species; &(Trelease) identifies F. agavephylla BROT as being the plant that provides fibers in @(Ceará) and @(Pernambuco).
One day before arriving at @(Caracol), we crossed a large stretch covered almost exclusively with angico and, 4 days after leaving @(Parnaguá village), between the landings of @(Brejo) and @(Sítio), we passed through an area of great greenery, with leafy trees, represented mostly by caraibeiras. In @(Brazil), only by exception do plant species of a certain size live in society and, with the exception of the Araucaria in the South, the Laguncularia racemosa GAERTN. and the Rhizophora mangle L. on the coast and a few others, they generally grow and develop scattered among hundreds of others. This greatly contributes to making timber extraction difficult throughout the country, contributing greatly to increasing the calamitous
[81]
devastation of our forests. The great angical that we crossed in @(Piauí), certainly represents an exception worthy of note, especially when it is not even remotely possible to suspect that the fact represents an intentional plantation.
After leaving the municipalities of @(Parnaguá) and @(Corrente) @(Piauí) we entered the municipality of @(Santa Rita do Rio Preto) @(Bahia) and then traveled through “paths” of thriving, rich and varied vegetation; the bamboos (Guada KTH.), COPAIFERA LANGSDORFFII, DESF. and several specimens of the genus Chorisia HUMB. and BOMP. and KTH. appear for the first time; a dwarf palm called piassava also appears in abundance, although it is not the Attalea funifera MART.
This is a palm tree probably of the genus Attalea HUMB. BOMP. and KTH., but perhaps still unknown to science; &(Barbosa Rodrigues) in Sertum palmarum, only briefly refers to it when dealing with the distribution of palm trees in @(Brazil); this author records the phenomenon of phosphorescence of the flowers; we have heard references to the fact several times and, according to information from &(Mr. José dos Reis), a dealer in @(S. Marcello), @(Bahia), this product was sold more than once. &(GARDNER) observed a similar fact in another palm tree in @(Piauí) and the phenomenon was due to the presence of an Agaricus. Representatives of the genus Bowdichia HUMB. BOMP. and KTH also appear. Plants of the genera Cereus HAW. and Opuntia MILL. have disappeared, as have the juazeiro, umbuzeiro, carnaúba; umburanas and baraúnas still persist. Cashew trees (Anacardium humile ST. HILAIRE) and pequi (Caryocar brasiliense CAMB.), Mauritia vinifera MART. (buriti), and macaúba (Acromia intumescens DR.) began to appear. Dendriculous vegetation began to appear on the trees, in addition to Tillandsia usneoides SCHULT., one of the rare epiphytic bromeliads of the semiarid zone, there were probably specimens of Vriesia LINDL. and Philodendron SCHOTT were quite numerous. We finally entered the “general” and the ones we traveled were, at first, rich in water; soon after @(S. Marcello) it became scarce; 60 kilometers later, representatives of the genus Vellosia VAND. began to appear and, further on, Hancornia GOMES; a buriti palm grove was frequently seen, which was a large patch of greenery and always revealed the presence of water. The buriti palm grove contains almost all the species found in the area, with the exception of terrestrial cacti, and forms a characteristic vegetation pattern; there are more species gathered together than can be found in hundreds of kilometers of trails; for the first time we came across examples of filicines, not only of the genus Polypodium L. but also of the epiphytes Ophioglossum L. and Ligodium SCHW., along with representatives of the genus Cecropia L. and Tibouchina AUBL. All the palm trees in the area are found there, but the buriti and butirana (Mauritia L.) and (Bactris JACQ.) predominate, as well as large trees; on the ground, examples of Caladium VENT, Sagittaria L. and Heliconia L. grow, and the central part is very swampy, and from top to bottom Scleria reflexa HUMB. and BOMP. and KTH. (tiririca) grow vigorously. The buriti palm grove in @(Goiás) is not only more frequent, but it is also larger and richer in plant species than in @(Bahia) and @(Piauí); in the buriti palm groves in Goiás, among the large trees, there is a gutiferous tree called landi (Calophyllum brasiliense CAMB.) which is very frequent; there is also the palm tree called “cabeçudo”, Cocos capitata MART. In some areas of Bahia, in the buriti palm groves or even outside, there is a tree known under the name “caraíba” (without it being the “claraíba”, Cordia insignis CHAM. which has a very similar name), a large tree whose identification we were unable to make.
In these “general areas” there are certainly two species of cashew trees: (Anacardium humile and A. pumilum ST. HILAIRE), which were loaded with ripe fruits in mid-July; everywhere, a grass that grows in ever-high clumps, probably belonging to the genus Eragrostis BEAUR, dominates. The “general areas” that extend from @(São Marcello) to @(Duro) are a transition point
[82]
between the 2nd province of &(Martius), of the Hamadriadas plants (regio extra-tropica et calida sicca) and the 3rd province formed by @(Goiás) of the Oreadas plants (regiomontano-campestris).
Along the entire route, the dilleniaceae Curatella americana L. is very abundant and, from the municipality of @(Santa Rita) the wolf fruit (Solanum grandiflorum RUIZ and PAR.) begins to appear; on the borders of @(Goiás), at the beginning of July, we find several trees covered by beautiful red brateas vines that cover them completely.
The large plain between the Bahian villages and the village of Duro is almost entirely covered with grasses; there is not a single tree or grove of trees to provide shade throughout this vast expanse. Scattered here, there and everywhere, are plants of Curatella americana and representatives of the genera Kielmeyera MART. and Plumeria TOURN. From then on, in all the places in Goiás, as soon as the traveler moves away from the riverbanks, the species of these two genera, belonging to different families but which at first sight present striking similarities, give the predominant note to the landscape.
Throughout the area we traveled, we were unable to find Selaginella convoluta SPRING, a plant we were very curious to learn about, as in our youth our attention was drawn to the subject as a result of an article published in &(Revista Brasileira), pp. 176-181. T. VIII-1896 and written by &(Dr. Garcia Redondo) and who had the epigraph: “The Resurrection Plant”, which, at that time, aroused our immense interest.
Although &(Hemsley) records in Biol. Centr. Am. Vol. III page 705 its presence in @(Nicaragua), @(Colombia) and @(Guyana), and the information from &(Martius) who also points out as its habitat the #backlands of @(Bahia) and @(Pernambuco), statements that serve to demonstrate how common the aforementioned plant is in @(South America), we were unable to find it in our route. The illustrious Mr. &(Loefgren), a great authority on questions pertaining to Brazilian flora, to whose study he has dedicated so many years, verified in @(Pernambuco) the species in question, in great profusion, to the point of forming a vegetative society that he calls Cactus-Selaginella (Cf. “Contributions to the forestry issue of the northeast region of Brazil”, page 37, December 1912).
In 1891-92, &(SPENCER LE MOORE) traveled through part of @(Mato Grosso) to study phanerogams; well, in this short space of time the illustrious botanist found eight genera and 211 completely new species.
&(Alberto Sampaio), has already published several works demonstrating the backwardness of the Flora of &(Martius). Mister, the flora that is still largely ignored in the semi-arid zone should be studied in detail, and a phytological museum should be established, where the studied specimens and especially the types of the new species found will be kept.
With the current specialization, a consequence of scientific development, it is possible for any individual to label himself as a botanist, zoologist, chemist, etc., so that a single botanist is incapable of perfectly knowing the Brazilian flora, which in the monumental work of &(Martius), contains the description of twenty thousand species; therefore, only a few botanists, working and collecting intensely, will be able to undertake the review and study of the flora of dry zones.
Let us mention an undoubtedly interesting fact that should be mentioned in support of what we are saying: in the entire dry region there is a tree called “umbú” or “imbú”, already described and figured by &(Marcgrav) on page 108 of Book III and by @(Piso) in chapter XXX 11-77-78 of Book IV, and yet determined by &(Martius) in the chapter “De Anacardiacearum Brasiliensium Usu” page 415 of Vol. 12, Pars II, as being Spondias purpurea L., whose description, however, does not correspond to the true “umbú”; it is enough to remember that &(Martius) gives the species a height of 10-13 meters, a growth never verified for the umbuzeiro of the northeast which, in addition to everything, seems to be a plant exclusive to some states in that area.
[83]
therefore, it is no longer found in @(Goiás); &(Martius), however, gives the geographical distribution of the species in some places in the @(Antilles) and several Brazilian states, where the species from the northeast is certainly not found and &(Engler) and &(Prantl) in Natuerliche Pflanzenfamilien III. Teil 5, Abth. pp. 150-151, 1896, say that Spondias purpurea L. is native to the @(Antilles) and exists spontaneously in @(Mexico), @(Peru), and @(Colombia). &(Hemsley), BW, when dealing with the Anacardiaceae in Biologia Centrali-Americana (Botany) Vol. I, p. 222, says, the proposal for Spondias purpurea: “True S. purpurea occurs in Jamaica, Cuba, and Colombia”, therefore not considering @(Brazil) as also being the habitat of this species. &(Ule), in 1908, in the 3rd fascicle of the 6th series of “Vegetationsbilder” by &(Karsten & Schenck), in the chapter entitled “Das Innere von Nordost-Brazilien” identified the umbuzeiro from there with Spondias lutea L., which is the common cajá, already disseminated throughout @(Tropical America), @(West Africa) and @(Java) according to &(Engler) and &(Prantl), op. cit. It is true that some Brazilian authors determine the species as being Spondias tuberosa &(Arruda Câmara), a name that does not appear in the species of the genus Spondias that &(Martius) deals with. As is well known, &(Arruda Câmara) identified several species, which, although never published, had their names made public by reading his manuscripts. We do not know whether the imbuzeiro is included in this case, and whether it was described in the “Centuries”, a work that has only been partially published and whose originals we assume are in the &(National Library) and which we have not yet had the opportunity to consult. If this did not happen, the imbuzeiro of the northeast will constitute a new species for science because it has not been properly described and published, according to the rules of botanical nomenclature. It is also possible that, under the name imbuzeiro, several perfectly defined species are included. At least one variety certainly exists, because in addition to the common type of the Bahian caatingas, there is another, larger and more leafy one, which has pubescent leaves and is quite common in @(Piauí).
This example is quite eloquent in showing not only the need to revise &(Martius)'s Flora, but also proves how the flora of that region needs to be studied. In almost analogous conditions we find the faveleira, one of the most characteristic trees of the caatinga, unknown to &(Martius) and which &(Loefgren) determined, sometimes as Jatropha acanthophylla or Pachystroma acanthophylla, a specific name that will have to prevail although doubts remain as to the generic placement.
The problem of droughts is multifaceted and, it seems to us, should be viewed from several perspectives and tackled simultaneously from all sides; for us, the opening of large or small dams only meets the current pressing need and, as the only measure, solves the irrigation problem at the present time, without influencing the true causes of periodic droughts; it is an indispensable palliative, but not a cure. Those of us who know the dry areas in the middle of the dry season, come to the idea that reforestation in the Brazilian northeast is the indispensable complement to damming, which, with the progressive drying up of the water sources, will only have a temporary effect.
When @(Brazil) was discovered, those areas were certainly already suffering the influence of the natural forces of progressive dissection; civilization invaded those #backlands, burning down the forests. Today, destruction continues on an ever greater scale; the unconscious #backlandsman is preparing the desert; this is the truth. - The aborigines who inhabited @(Brazil) before the discovery only knew one way to cultivate the land, which was fire; from them, the invaders not only inherited the technique, but also perpetuated the technology absorbed by the vernacular, as can be seen in the words “capoeira, caiçava and coivara”. Anyone who reads the “Historical, Ethnographic and Political Dissertation” by &(IA Cerqueira e Silva,
[84]
appeared on pp. 143-195 of the Rev. of the &(Inst. Hist. and Geogr. Brazilian), Vol. XII - Rio, 1849, will see the appeal that the ouvidor &(F. Nunes da Costa) launched to the @(metropolis), in §(June 20, 1784), regarding the devastation of the @(forests of Jequiriçá) and @(Rio de Contas), in @(Bahia). From reading it, it is clear that, since 1652, the alarm had already been heard, obtaining practical results in the regiment of October 13, 1751, which took measures regarding the cutting of hardwoods. Due to new representations taken to the decision of the @(Metropolis), it issued the royal charter of March 13, 1797, determining that a plan be organized to prevent the destruction of the forests. However, everything was in vain and the devastation that is currently being seen throughout the country is taking on truly frightening proportions.
One of the largest Indian tribes in Brazil, the Cayapós, got their name, according to experts, from the fact that they set fires.
Reforestation, therefore, will be the only way to combat the desert in formation. To do this, it is necessary to study the flora in advance, in order to take advantage of the vegetation centers, where they exist, and, little by little, overcome nature;
We did not cross any forests in the entire region we traveled, except for a wide strip measuring about 12 kilometers near the capital of Goiás. The vegetation of this state surprised us greatly, because from the narratives and descriptions we were convinced that it was one of the richest areas in forests in the country. Our observation refers to the entire area between the village of Duro and the city of Porto Nacional and from there to the state capital. From reading Ule's report on the Central Plateau, we already knew of the existence of fields whose flora is extraordinarily rich in species, and we found the lack of references to forests strange and assumed that it was something located on the plateau.
Now, we can state that the picture drawn by that botanist can, in general terms, be generalized to the area of @(Goiás) that we traveled through. What is called forest in the regions of the Northeast is the narrow strip of vegetation that grows on the banks of rivers, streams and lakes; in the @(Rio Tocantins), the forest edge is wider and more vigorous than that observed in the rivers @(São Francisco), @(Rio Preto), @(Rio Corrente) etc.; however, it never has the width and vigor of the vegetation on the banks of the watercourses of the @(South) and @(extreme North of Brazil).
As for the fertility of the soil in Goiás, it only truly exists in the south of the state, from @(Curralinho) to @(Anhanguera); the north is very poor even in pastures, which is easy to see by the size of the cattle, in contrast to what is seen in certain areas of @(Piauí).


Bibliography




&(CEZAR, DIOGO J.) & &(SAMPAIO, AJ DE)
	1913
	Notes for the review of the Flora of &(MARTIUS). Farming - Year 17, Nos. 7 and 8 pp 14–156 - @(Rio de Janeiro).
	&(LOEFGREN, A.)
	1910
	Botanical Notes - @(Ceará)
Publ. No. 2 - Ser. 1, A (Botanical investigations) of the &(Inspectorate of Works against Drought) - @(Rio de Janeiro)
	&(LOEFGREN, A.)
	1912
	Contributions to the forestry issue in the @ region (Northeast Brazil).
Same - Ibid. Publ. No. 18, Rio de Janeiro.
	&(PISONIS, G.) & &(MARCGRAVI DE LIEBSTAD, G.)
	1648
	Historia Naturalis Brasiliae. Amstelodami.
	&(SAMPAIO, AJ DE)
	1912
	Considerations on the Flora Brasiliensis of &(MARTIUS) regarding the need for its revision and continuation - @(Rio de Janeiro)
	&(SAMPAIO, AJ DE)
	1913
	Notes for the revision of the Flora of &(MARTIUS). First alphabetical list of works. A Lavoura, Year 17, Nos. 1-6, pp.1953. @(Rio de Janeiro).
	&(ULE, E.)
	1908
	Das Innere von Nordost-Brasiliens in Vegetationsbilder de KARSTEN & SCHENK 6. Reihe. Heft 3 - Tafel 13-15 - Jena 1908.
	&(ULE, E.)
	1909
	Extraction and trade of rubber from @(Bahia). Translated by &(Carlos Moreira) - @(Rio de Janeiro)
	&(ZIMMERMANN, A.)
	1913
	Manihot-Kautschuk - Jena
	

[85]
Poisonous plants


On the banks of rivers and lakes, it is very common to see a convolvulaceae that blooms from March to June and is commonly called “canudo” (Ipomoea fistulosa MART). The locals say that it is a highly poisonous plant for the cattle that feed on it when the pastures become scarce; in fact, we can personally observe this fact on the banks of the @(Parnaguá lake), @(Piauí) and also its consequence in the appearance of animals there called “encanudados”, that is, intoxicated by the “canudo”, whose first symptom is that the cattle “get dizzy”. On several occasions we had the opportunity to see the cattle belonging to &(Mr. Colonel O'Donnell de Alencar), a farmer living in @(Parnaguá village), arrive in the afternoon and verify the presence of animals with a stumbling gait, heads turned to the ground, visibly sick and which, by the aforementioned breeder, were pointed out to us as “encanudados” animals.
According to reports, when cattle eat too much of the “canudo” foliage, cases of death can be recorded; however, in general, once the type of drunkenness has passed, the animal recovers.
We tried to obtain seeds of the plant in question, which we planted in the garden intended for plants, maintained at @(Manguinhos); we easily obtained excellent specimens and, in the company of &(Dr. Antonio Fontes) we began research aimed at verifying the nature of the toxicant. All the experiments we carried out on rats, guinea pigs, dogs and rabbits resulted in negative results, even using enormous doses of juice extracted by expression.
It is known that certain plants are only toxic when they are in bloom, and we need to eliminate this hypothesis before declaring the “straw” innocent, since, at the time we observed the “straw-like” animals, a large number of the convolvulaceae in question were in bloom and our experiments were carried out at an earlier time. We also need to eliminate the possible hypothesis that the “straw” itself is harmless, but that when ingested with another plant, a new compound that is toxic may be formed. Finally, the explanation could still reside in the fact of a poorly made observation, escaping the real culprit, which grows in the same places where Ipomoea fistulosa is found and this hypothesis is not at all improbable since the species in question has already been scientifically recorded as existing in @(Espírito Santo) &(NEUWIED), @(Goiás) &(POHL), Pará (several authors) and even in @(Guatemala) &(FRIEDRICHSTAL), Peru &(HEMSLEY), without anyone accusing it as such; however, a similar accusation about a plant called “canudo” in @(Ceará) as can be seen in the work of &(CAMINHOÁ): “Das Plantas Tóxicas do @(Brasil)” page 172 - @(Rio) - 1871 and determined by the author as belonging to the genus Calonyction and which, with
[86]
in all probability it should be identified with Ipomoea fistulosa &(MART. HUBER, J.) in “Arboretum Amazonicum” p. 30 - Est. 29 deals with “wild cotton”, the name by which Ipomoea fistulosa is baptized in Pará. The magnificent photograph reproduces the “straw” in full bloom: the text makes no reference to the toxicity of the plant. In a posthumous work by &(V. CHERMONT DE MIRANDA), published in Vol. V - No. 1 pp. 96-151 - (cf. p. 129) of the Bulletin of the &(Museu Goeldi-Pará) in 1907-1908 and entitled “The fields of @(Marajó) and its flora”, when dealing with wild cotton, it says nothing about its toxicity, although it gives detailed information about the aforementioned plant. SPEGAZ-ZINI-Entregas III-IV. T. LXXVII pp. 159-164-April-1914 published under the title “Notes and Notes on Poisonous Plants for Livestock”, a work in which he verified, alongside some true popular observations about poisonous plants, several others that were completely false. The curious thing is that some of the vegetables considered poisonous by the people of that country, for example Chloris distichophylla LAG., are cultivated among us for fodder. However, the opposite is also observed, since Enterolobius timbouva MART., known in Argentina as “timbó” and among us also by that name, as well as those of “timbaúva, tamboril, timbó-uva” and others, as can be seen in the cited work by &(CAMINHOÁ) who claims that the bark is ichthyotoxic, does not however constitute for &(SPEGAZZINI) a poisonous species, despite the statements to the contrary by the people of the two countries. Later, the Argentine author had the opportunity to verify that only these were toxic. The subject, in fact, in itself offers great complexity, it is enough to report that the Bureau of Plant Industry in 1908 published with the authority of &(CRAWFORD, AC) bulletin 129 entitled “Barium a cause of the loco-weed Disease” to demonstrate that the poisoning caused in cattle in Colorado by the ingestion of certain plants of the genus Astragalus was due to presence of barium salts in plant tissue. In July 1912, the same Bureau published bulletin no. 246 under the title: “The relation of Barium to the loco-weed disease”, where &(MARSH), DC), &(ALSBERG, LC) & &(BLACK, FO) studied and demonstrated the existence of barium in certain forage species belonging to the genus Panicum and Andropogon that grow in Virginia, but that are not toxic, since barium is found in an almost insoluble form. The experiments carried out by the last two authors with different species of Astragalus prove that the great toxicity of some has nothing to do with barium and its compounds, and that the poisoning is caused by a completely different cause.
Among the papilionaceae there is one that is very infamous and which several authors who have dealt with nutrition in times of drought have already discussed; we want to refer to “mucunan”, whose name includes at least two scientific species: Mucuna altissima DC and Mucuna rostrata BENTH.
The idea of the toxicity of the plant originated among the indigenous people, since &(PISON), on page 48, book IV, says the following about Mucuna guacu, as he called it: “I saw effracta, pulcherrimi globuli, interstitiiis divisi, exinde prodeunt, tres quatuorve, punicei et rubri coloris, rotundi, laeves, magno hylo, qui si in aqua macerantur vim noxiam ex parte deponunt, et cum Tipioca de Mandioca praeparati Barbaris edules sunt,” &(MARCGRAV) speaks again on page 18 of the first book of the mucuna determined as Mucuna urens DC or M. pruriens DC. Over time, the idea of the toxicity of mucunan grew, since it is written in several authors from Ceará about the need to wash the starch of the seeds in nine waters; We also heard this statement from several people in @(Piauí).
We brought abundant seed material and, together with our colleague (Dr. Antonio Fontes), we carried out experiments with animals in various ways, but in laboratory use, without the slightest result.
[87]
At least one of the species, Macuna altissima DC, is widespread, not only in Brazil but also in the Antilles, and we are not aware that, except in the northeast region, any resident of any other area has accused the mucunan of being poisonous. Colonel Manoel Antunes de Macedo Júnior informed us that, during the droughts of 1877-79 and 1889-90, the seeds of the mucunan were much sought after by the inhabitants of the municipality of São Raimundo Nonato for food purposes; before being ingested, they were washed several times or left to “pub”, as those who did not take these precautions would poison themselves. The belief in its toxicity is undoubtedly widespread throughout the northeast, however, the experiments carried out have destroyed it, leaving the possibility that the immoderate and prolonged use of mucunan starch could cause disturbances in organisms that are already very impoverished.
Under the name “babeira” we have been referred to in several places as a very poisonous plant that causes the death of horses; it is a legume. The “golda” from the shavings of the trunk of the faveleira (Pachystroma acanthophylla LOEFG.) is used to poison birds; it is said that goats also die if they drink it; however, on several occasions I have observed goats feeding on the bark and pigs trying to feed on the roots. The seeds are eaten by children without much inconvenience.
Throughout the area, there are several rubiaceous plants commonly called “rat grass” and already known as &(PISON) and &(MARCGRAV), which recorded their true indigenous name of “tangarata” (See Op. cit. 1648 edition, page 47, Lib. III and Hist. Plant. Lib. II, page 80), one of which was named Psychotria marcgravii SPRENG., and there is also another known scientifically as Hamelia patens JACQ.
It is also worth mentioning “tingui”, the common name of several species of Malpighiaceae belonging to the genus Mascagnia BERT. and Tetrapterys CAV., or even of a Sapindaceae of the genus Paullinia. Simarouba versicolor ST. HILAIRE (Parahyba bread and in some places in Piauí “dog-killing bread”) is considered to be very poisonous. This plant, in fact, is already used in medicine. Another poisonous plant in the region that is used to “tinguijar” (kill fish by poisoning the water in which they live) is a shrub that is very common in certain areas of Piauí, where it is known by the name “timbó”; in fact, this name, like that of “tingui”, includes a large number of plants belonging to different genera and families in Brazil. In addition, a certain plant species called tingui in a certain area is known by the name timbó, or vice versa, in another part of the country. The plant we are referring to is a tree 5-6 meters high, with a large drupaceous and woody fruit, with sub-winged seeds; separated by septa, they appear to belong to the sapindaceae Magonia glabrata IS. ST. HIL. The seeds are rich in a substance that the natives use to make soap. The plant in question is also found in @(Goiás). It is extremely abundant in the vicinity of @(Caracol) @(Piauí) and completely non-existent in the Bahian plains, and this is probably due to the high humidity of these regions; in this particular, our observation agrees with the verifications made by &(WARMING) in @(Lagoa Santa) when, studying “The xerophilous nature” of the countryside of that locality, he records Magonia glabrata as a field tree. (Cf. “Lagoa Santa. Contribution to phytobiological geography" by &(E. WARNING), pp. 71 and 206, @(Belo Horizonte) 1909. Translation from Danish by &(A. LOEFGREN)).
On the farm @(Tanque), 32 kilometers from the village of @(São Raimundo Nonato), I was told for the first time about a certain water that very quickly kills the cattle that use it; often the phenomenon is only noticed after the number of dead cattle draws attention to the water, because the transformation occurs unexpectedly, and the source starts to provide poisonous water. The farmers believe that this happens as a result of the floods sweeping the water into the
[88]
farm water toxic principles existing in sheep and goat pens.
We had the opportunity to verify, in the aforementioned municipality, several watering holes, fenced in order to prevent access to livestock of any kind, since all livestock are sensitive to poisoned water. When we were staying at the farm owned by &(Colonel M. Antunes de Macedo), we tried to test the veracity of the fact; for this purpose we took a goat, making it drink 400 cc. of the aforementioned water; after 3 hours the animal died, saving the smaller goat that had drunk the same quantity of drinking water.
Several bottles containing water from the same location, where the liquid that had proven toxic to the goat was collected, upon arriving at the Institute, after 6 months of collection, lost their toxicity, as none of the animals died. On the aforementioned farm, 5 cows died in a single day after drinking from the place. On the @(Sítio farm), 12 kilometers from @(São Raimundo), there is also water that suddenly became poisonous about 10 years ago, and has not lost its toxicity since.
&(Mr. RODERIC CRANDALL), in his work on “Geography, Geology, Water Supply, etc.” 1910, on page 35, reports a similar fact, observed by him in @(arraial Pojuca), where, having dug a well 50 palms deep, half in hard earth and the other half in semi-decomposed rock, the residents were able to verify the following: “At first, it was dry, but gradually it filled up to 14 palms from the opening with perfectly clear water, but so loaded with mineral salts that the cattle that drank from it died little by little, slowly poisoned”.
The semi-decomposed rock is called “soap” in Piauí and some locals admit the possibility of the water becoming poisonous as it slowly filters through the “soap” until it gradually fills the well. Our observation agrees perfectly with that of Mr. R. CRANDALL, although they were made in different places and at different times; however, there is a divergence in the speed of the poisoning, because in the experiment to which we subjected the goat, the poison acted quickly, which was in agreement with the observation of local farmers.


Protozoa
The plankton we collected was determined by Dr. A. MARQUES DA CUNHA, who was in charge of these studies at the OSWALDO CRUZ Institute; unfortunately, a large part of the material was lost because the containers broke during the trip.
The material was fixed in SCHAUDINN liquid and is generally not very rich, although we left it to rest for a few days in order to obtain multiplication of the species. However, since nothing exists to date about the plankton in @(Central Brazil), the contribution that follows is of interest to science. The material, collected in @(Parnaguá lagoon), was the one that offered the best results; this body of water is about 6 kilometers wide by 8 kilometers long and the greatest depth we found was 4.20 m; the material was collected not only along the entire route from @(“Middle Island”) to @(“Porto”) using a &(MULLER) net, but also at various points along the shore.
The limnoplankton of the localities @(Peixe) @(Bahia) and @(Tanque) @(Piauí) comes from small water collections, heleoplankton from &(VOLK).
Species found in the plankton of various locations in the dry zone:
@(Fish), @(Bahia) @(Municipality of Remanso)
Pachus pleuronectes (OF MULLER 1773)
Trinema cheialys (EHRB. 1833).
Centropyxis aculeata (EHRB. 1830).
Conjugated (several species).
Staurastrum gracile RALFS
@(Tank), @(Piauí) @(Municipality of São Raimundo Nonato).
Spirogyra sp.?
Closterium sp.?
@(Parnaguá Lagoon) @(Municipality of Parnaguá).
Centropyxis aculeata (EHRB. 1830)
[89]
Euglypha alveolata (DUJ. 1841)
Euglena fusca (KLEBS 1883)
Phacus longicauda, (EHRB. 1830).
Entosiphon sulcatum, (DUJ. 1841).
Chilomonas paramaecium, (EHRB. 1831).
Coleps hirtus, (OF MULLER 1786)
Limnetic difflugia, LEVANDER.
Copepods in large numbers.
Among the pathogenic protozoa we found Plasmodium falciparum and vivax, parasites of malignant and benign tertians; Trypanosoma cruzi CHAGAS; in the “alma de gato” (Piaya) and “rola rattlesnake” (Scardafella squamosa) representatives of the genus Halteridium were found and some Belonopterus cayennensis were found - if parasitized by gregarine leukocytes. We were surprised that we did not find any parasitized snakes, which is so common in the South of @(Brazil).
Worms
The worm material was determined by &(Dr. LAURO TRAVASSOS), in charge of this section at &(Instituto Oswaldo Cruz); there are still 4 trematodes and 3 cestodes under research.
Unfortunately, most of the material arrived at the Institute in conditions unsuitable for study, due to the loss of the fixative liquid due to the containers being broken; in this case, the specimens of Gigantorhynchus and Physaloptera, found in the cangambá.
Of the material still under study, it is worth mentioning an Anoplocephalina from a tapir that is probably new; Physocephalus nitidulans, which parasitizes the small intestine of the same mammal, produces highly developed nodules where a large number of specimens accumulate.
Filaria horrida DIES., found in large numbers in the subcutaneous tissue of the rhea, a fact that has now come to the attention of the people, has become part of the genus Dicheilonema.
The Amphistoma, found in the capybara, is certainly a new species that will be described in due course; only 1 specimen was found, which may be explained by the fact that the animal is rare when, as a rule, they are less parasitized.
The &(LOOS) method proved to be excellent for the preservation of helminth eggs found in feces, allowing, many months later, the diagnosis of the eggs of Necator americanus STIL., Schistosomum mansoni SAMBON and Trichuris tricurus L., found parasitizing humans.
Despite the large number of animals of all classes whose blood was examined, very few positive results were found for microfilariae, only found in Alonata belzebut (guariba) and in the water-dweller Fluvicola climazura.
Blood parasites are, without a doubt, less frequent than in the south of @(Brazil).


List of worms found
Acanthocephala:
Gigantorhynchus compressus (RUD. 1802).
Cariama cristata (L.) Intest.
@(Goias)- @(Hard), VII-912.
Gigantorhynchus aurae n. sp. 913. Cathartes aura L. @(Piauí) - @(Tanque) - 912
Gigantorhynchus sp. Conepatus suffocans
@(Saint Raymond Nonato), 8-V-912.
Nematodes.
Ascaris sp? Tigrisoma lineatum (BODD.)
@(Piauí) - @(Parnaguá), 6-VII-912.
Aspidodera fasciata (SCHNEIDER, 1866).
Dasypus novemcinctus L. Itest.
@(Piauí) - @(Tank), 10-V-912.
Aspidodera scoleciformis, (DIES. 1851).
Dasypus novemcinctus L. Itest.
@(Piauí) - @(Tank), 10-V-912.
Dicheilonema horridum (DIES. 1851).
Rhea americana LATH. Sub cuti.
@(Piauí) - @(Snail). VII-912.
Filaria gracilis DUD. 1809. Monkey (Cebus), Goiás, VII-912.
Oxyuris minuta SCHNEIDER 1866. Howler monkey (Alonata belzebul). Intestine.
@(Piauí), 3-VII-912.
Onzolaimus megatyphlon (RUD. 1819)
Chameleon (Iguana sp.) Intestine. @(Piauí). @(São Raimundo), V-912


[90]
Oxyuris obesa DIESING, 1819. Hydrochoerus capibara ERX. Gross test. @(Goiás) - @(Parnaguá), VI-912.
Physocephalus nitidulans (SCHNEIDER, 1866). Tapirus americanus Goiás, Peixe XII-912- (Bahia).
Physaloptera sp. ? Conepatus suffocans @(São Raimundo), 8-V-912.
Subulura strongylina (RUD, 1819)? Gallus domesticus L. Itest.
Strongylus sp.? Tapirus americanus @(Goiás) - @(Fish), XII-912.
Trichocephalus sp.? Dasypus novemcinctus L. Intestine. @(Piauí) - @(Tanque), 10-V-912.
Trematodes.
Schistosomum mansoni SAMBON, 1907.
(Eggs). Homo sapiens L. Feces.
Paramphistomidae sp. n.? Hydrochoerus capibara. Large intestine.
Cotylotretus grandis (BRAUN, 1901).
Ajaja ajaja.
Cestodea.
Ochorista surinamensis COHN, 1902 -
Dasypus noremcinctus L.@( Piauí).
Tank, St. Raymond. 10, V-913.
Chapmania tauricollis (CHAPMAN.)
1876?. (The material was macerated). In @(Piauí), @(Caracol).


List of collected ticks
Lot 1. 82 ♂, ♀ and 9 nymphs of Amblyomma cayennense FABRIC.
1 ♀ of Amblyomma parvum ARAG. collected from capybara (Hydrochoerus capybara) @(Parnaguá) - State of @(Piauí) on 23-6-12
Lot 2. 12 ♂ and 1 ♀ of Amblyomma concolor NN., caught on armadillo (Tolypeutes tricinctus) in @(Parnaguá), State of @(Piauí) on 9-5-12
Lot 3. 5 ♂ and 3 ♀ of Amblyomma concolor NN., caught on armadillos (Tolypeutes tricinctus) in @(Duro), State of @(Goiás) in July 1912.
Lot 4. 1 ♂, 1 ♀ of Amblyomma longirostre KOCH and 1 ♀ of Amblyomma cayennense, collected on porcupine (Cercolabes vellosus) in the State of @(Goiás).
Lot 5. 3 ♂, 1 ♀ and 1 nymph of Amblyomma concolor NN. and 1 ♀ of Amblyomma cayennense FABRIC., caught on armadillo (Dasypus novemcinctus) in the State of @(Goiás).
Lot 6. 2 Nymphs of Amblyomma cayennense FABRIC., collected from a dog in the State of Goiás.
Lot 7. 1 ♂ of Amblyomma fossum Nn., 1 ♀ of Margaropus microplus CAN. and 1 nymph of Amblyomma cayennense FABR.
Lot 8. 19 ♂, 52 ♀ and 1 nymph of A.cayennense FABRIC., 1 ♀ of Amblyomma parvum ARAG., collected from tapir (Tapirus americanus) in @(São José), in the State of @(Goiás) in August 1912.
Lot 9. 1 ♂, 1 ♀ and 1 nymph of Amblyomma concolor NN., collected on Cangambá (Conepatus suffocans) in @(Caracol) in the State of @(Piauí).
Lot 10. 47 ♂, 73 ♀ and 4 nymphs of Amblyomma cayennense FABRIC., 1 ♂ and 9 ♀ of Margaropus microplus CAN., caught on horseback in @(Parnaguá), in the State of @(Piauí) on 29-6-11.
Lot 11. 10 ♀ Margaropus microplus CAN., caught on red deer in @(Duro), State of @(Goiás), in July 1912.
Lot 13. 4 ♂, 1 ♀ nymph of Amblyomma concolor NN., caught on armadillo (Tolypeutes tricinctus) in @(Parnaguá), State of @(Piauí) on July 8, 1912.
[91]
Lot 14. 10 Nymphs and 2 larvae of Amblyomma cayennense FABRIC., caught on Guariba (Alonata belzebul) in Angico, in the State of @(Piauí) on July 3, 1912.
Lot 15. 8 ♀ of Margaropus microplus CAN., caught on deer (Caracus sp.?) in the State of @(Piauí) on 21-6-12.
Lot 16. 8 ♀ of Margaropus microplus CAN., 2 nymphs of Amblyomma cayennense FABR., caught on cattle in @(Parnaguá), in the State of @(Piauí) on 30-6-12.
Lot 17. 21 ♀, 55 nymphs and 9 larvae of Amblyomma cayennense FABRIC., 1 ♀ Margaropus microplus CAN., caught on horseback in @(Parnaguá), State of @(Piauí).
Lot 18. 14 ♀ of Margaropus microplus CAN., brought from @(Formosa) in the State of @(Bahia).
Lot 19. 37 specimens of Ornithodoros talajei GUERIN-MENEVILLE, caught in Mocó burrows (Cerodon rupestris), in the State of @(Piauí).
Lot 20. 5 ♂ and 18 ♀ of Amblyomma cayennense FABRIC., caught on horseback in @(Parnaguá), in the State of @(Piauí).
Lot 21. 17 ♂, 4 ♀, 9 larvae of Amblyomma concolor Nn., caught on armadillo (Tolypeutes trincictus) in @(Onça), in the State of @(Piauí).
The collection of ixodids was classified by &(Dr. H. ARAGÃO), in charge of studying this group at &(Instituto Oswaldo Cruz).
In the surroundings of @(Juazeiro) @(Pery-pery) and surrounding areas, we found that ticks were not very abundant and in this place we began to hear references to ticks that inhabit the mocó burrows (Kerodon rupestris WIED.) and that according to the information, it is an ixodida different from the “rodoleiro” and “estrela”, names by which the people baptize each and every species of ixodida.
In vain in that locality we tried to collect the ticks that infect the rodent's burrows; from @(Petrolina) to the vicinity of @(São Raimundo Nonato) the ticks are very few in number; in the place called @(Santa Anna), we learned of the existence of mocós nearby and the presence in their burrows not only of ticks different from the common ones, but also of wall bugs (Triatoma).
From @(Juazeiro) to this place, the references about the existence of mocós, when they were positive, showed that they were far from our route. This time we were happier, because we managed to catch about 40 specimens of Ornithodoros talaje, a species we had already caught in the nymphal stage in Xerém, parasitizing Coelogynes paca RENGG.
The mocó was not yet known as a host and, although O. talaje has a huge distribution area, it was not yet included in @(Piauí); the larvae gather in the ears of the mocós, which become swollen; as they are bright red, at first glance they resemble mites of the genus Trombidium. FABR. From this finding, it can be stated with all probability that the ticks existing in the burrows of mocós in the vicinity of @(Juazeiro) are O. talaje. Further on, in a place called @(Caracol), we searched in vain for the aforementioned ixodidas in the burrows of the same rodent, which were only found in @(Santa Anna). From @(São Raimundo) to the vicinity of the town of @(Caracol), the ticks are relatively abundant for those places; but from @(Caracol) onwards they become scarce until they are completely absent, according to our checks and information, in a large part of the municipality of @(Parnaguá).
[92]
They then reappear in greater abundance than that observed previously, as we approach the village of @(Parnaguá);
One can imagine the extent of the existence of places where ticks are not found; the problem of our livestock industry, to a large extent, is linked to ticks; it would be completely useless to talk about improving cattle and horse breeds when our lands in general are swollen with hematozoa that are pathogenic to cattle and horses and that are transmitted exclusively by ticks.
In the south of the country, currently, &(Mr. FARQUHAR) tries to make cattle feed on a large scale and, despite the service being directed by a parasitologist of universal renown, such as &(Mr. MAC NEA)L, the sadness has caused true devastation. The place to which we refer is more or less 100 kilometers from the city of @(Remanso), on the banks of the @(Francisco River) or from the @(village of Santa Rita do Rio Preto), on the banks of the same river.
From @(Parnaguá) onwards, the ticks are always increasing in number and, as we thought in July, the larval forms predominated; when we left the municipality of @(Corrente) in Piauí, we visited the place called @(Pery-pery), belonging to the municipality of @(Santa Rita), @(Bahia). There the residents complained bitterly about the ticks and used to burn the pastures in order to combat the plague. However, where the ticks really plague is from the north to the center of @(Goiás); this entire area is condemned, mainly for this reason, to not be grazed profitably. Almost the entire route the farmers referred to us about “carrapatagem”, that is, an enormous abundance of ticks attacking the sick cattle and which, without exception, is interpreted as an internal disease, causing the direct transformation of the blood into ticks. The most educated and intelligent easily understood our explanation, that cattle were attacked by diseases transmitted by ticks, whose evolution we explained; the majority, however, did not understand the simple truth and remained convinced that, under certain conditions, blood is transformed directly into ticks.
The fauna was not rich in species, as only 6 species of ixodids were identified from 14 hosts; Amblyomma cajennense FABR. was found to be present in almost all hosts; no new species were recorded.
In the capital of @(Goiás) we began to hear references to the “ground tick”, which was accused of causing wounds that were difficult to heal; based on the descriptions and habits, we immediately thought it was some kind of Ornithodoros, since it attacks at night and hides in the sand on the ground; it is already very common in the place called @(Areias), close to @(the state capital); it occurs throughout the south of @(Goiás) and informants claim that the introduction of the aforementioned ixodida is relatively recent, since it was brought by cattle drivers from the state of @(Mato Grosso). The stubborn wounds are more likely to be secondary infections than due to the specific nature of the aforementioned Ornithodoros. According to information from several people, the “ground ticks” already infest the cities and towns of @(Areia), @(Alemão), @(Caiapó), @(Jatahy), @(Mineiros), @(Corrente) in Goiás. An intelligent tropeiro who travels between Goiás and Mato Grosso, assured us of the existence of the ixodida in question in the Mato Grosso towns of @(Santana da Parnaíba), @(Aquidauana), @(Nioac), @(Miranda). In places where it is abundant, it becomes essential to sleep in hammocks and “sapecar” (scorch) the ground.
&(Dr. H. Aragão) described, under the name Ornithodoros rostratus, specimens of a species sent from @(Mato Grosso); in all probability the “ground tick”, so common in the south of @(Goiás), is the species in question.


[93]
scorpions, causing poisoning phenomena, accompanied by vomiting, tongue tremor, cephalalgia, etc., the species responsible being probably Rhopalurus agamemnon (KOCH), which reaches 90 mm in length in some individuals; the poisonous spiders are represented by Avicularia avicularia L, and other species, commonly known by the name of “tarantula”. The specimens, brought from @(Parnaguá), are probably of the species mentioned above. The genus Avicularia, according to the catalogue of &(PETRUNKEVITCH) (A synonymic index catalogue of spiders of North, Central and South America, with all adjacent islands, Greenland, Bermuda, West-Indies, Terra del Fuego, Galapagos, etc. published in the Bulletin of the Amer. Mus. of Natur Hist. Vol. XXIX, New York 1911), is represented in @(Brazil) by 5 species and one variety.
Under that common name, the people of @(Brazil) call representatives of the following genera: Acanthoscurria AUSSERER, Avicularia LAM., Ephebopus SIMON Eurypelma POCOCK, Psalmopoeus POCK. and Theraphosa THORELL, if the large T. blondi is in fact found in @(Brazil). The Aviculariidae, despite being so apparent, have habits that are still unknown. There are the most varied versions about them, not only regarding their type of diet, but also about the accidents caused by their bites.
We are not aware of any observation that can be guaranteed, without the slightest suspicion of doubt, of an accident caused by a “tar spider”, nor what its consequences may be.
As for the type of food, there are the same uncertainties; some naturalists say they have observed that their way of feeding is that they do not reject even a small bird; this is, in fact, the most common belief among laymen and laymen. For a long time we had a large specimen of Avicularia avicularia in captivity, which, until it died, refused to eat in any way, even though we varied the food offered in every way. In fact, we know that captivity completely distorts the expected results, as is easily observed with snakes; however, &(PICKARD), &(CAMBRIDGE) who went to the @(Amazonas) exclusively to study our spiders, confesses that he was unable to know in any way what the type of food of our “tarantula spiders” really is. (Cf &(CAMBRIDGE), PO “On the Theraphosidae of the lower @(Amazonas), being an account of the new genera and species of this group of spiders discovered during the expedition of the steamship “FARADAY” up the river Amazonas” Proc. zool. Soc. pp. 716-766 London — 1896).
Scorpions have caused deaths in children, as we have been told, which is very likely, since in @(Minas Gerais) Tityus bahiensis and other similar species, much smaller than Rhopalurus agamemnon, are responsible for several deaths in @(Belo Horizonte) and other locations in Minas Gerais.
It seems that the venom of the species from the northeast is very different from that of the species from the South of Brazil, as the symptoms of poisoning are entirely different.


List of hematophagous insects found along the route.


Simuliidae.


1. S. amazonicum GOELDI (Pium)
2. S. simplicicolor LUIZ
3. S. orbitale LUTZ
4. S. pruinosum LUTZ


Ceratopogonidae.
1. Cotocripus spec.


Tabanidae.
Pangoninae.


1. Erephopsis xanthopogon MACQ.
2. Erephopsis leucopogon WIED.
3. Erephopsis pubescens LUTZ
4. Esenbeckia ferruginea MACQ.


[94]
Chrysoplnne.
5. Chrysops costatus FABR.
6. Chrysops leucospilus WIED.
7. Chrysops fusciapex LUTZ
8. Chrysops molestas WIED.
9. Chrysops parvifascia LUTZ


Diachlorinae.
10. Diachlorus Neivai LUTZ
11. Diachlorus vitripennis LUTZ
12. Diachlorus curvipes FABR.
13. Diachlorus nigristigma n. sp.


Lepidosclaginae.
14. Lepidosclaga paradoxa LUTZ


Tabaninae.


15. Acanthocera anacantha LUTZ & NEIVA
16. Dichelacera januarii n. sp.
17. Dichelacera leucomelas n. sp.
18. Dicladocera simulans n. sp.
19. Dicladocera relida n. sp.
20. Cryptotylus unicolor WIED.
21. Chlorotabanus Mexicanas L.
22. Poecilosoma quadripunctatus FABR.
23. Tabanus cinereus WIED.
24. Tabanus importunus WIED.
25. Tabanus valterii MACQ.
26. Tabanus mucronatus LUTZ & N EI VA
27. Tabanus trigonostichus LUTZ.
28. Tabanus cayennensis WIED.
29. Tabanus rubrithorax MACQ.
30. Tabanusfuscofasciatus MACQ.
31. Neotabanus modestas WIED.
32. Neotabanus dorsiger WIED.
33. Neotabanus comitans WIED.
34. Tabanus pseudocinereus n. sp.
35. Tabanus cinereus WIED.
36. Dichelacera varia WIED.


Culicidae.
@(BAHIA).


@(Joazeiro).
Janthinosoma discrucians WALK. 35
Melanoconion atratum THEO. ...4
Cellia argyritarsis ROB.-DESV. .. 16
Stegomyia calopus MEIG......................
Culex fatigans WIED., common in homes.


@(Pery-Pery).
Janthinosoma discrucians WALK. .. 11
Culex scaoularis RDN.................................. 4
Cellia argyrotarsis ROB.-DESV. .. 2


Municipalities of @(Sta. Rita do Rio Preto), @(Remanso), @(Casa Nova Stream), Various locations: @(Formosa), @(Váu), @(S. Marcello), @(Pedra do Foge), @(Veados), @(Pery-Pery), @(Pouso-Alegre), @(Carahybas), @(Jatobá), @(Peixe), @(S. José da Canastra).


Manguinhosia lutzi CRUZ.......... 85
Stethomyia nimba, THEO............. 31
Cellia. brasiliensis CHAGAS... 18
Cellia tarsimaculata GOELDI. ... 9
Myzorhynchella lutzi, CRUZ.......... 12
Chagasia fajardoi, LUTZ............. 2
C. scapularis RDN........................ 1
T. juxtamansonia, CHAGAS .... 4
Sabethes albiprivatus LUTZ....... 1


@(PERNAMBUCO).
Municipality of @(Petrolina).
Locations:


@(Petrolina).
Janthinosoma discrucians WALK. . 8
Cellia argyrotarsis. ROB.-DESV. . 6


Stegomyia calopus MEIG. and Culex fatigans WIED. present in the city's homes.


@(Tiger-Newfoundland), @(Cauldron), @(Roberto's Waterfall):
Janthinosoma discrucians WALK. . 12
Cellia argyritarsis ROB.-DESV. . 14
Culex scapularis, RDN................. 3


@(PIAUÍ).


Municipality of @(Saint John of Piauí).


Locations:


@(Ponta da Serra), @(Rosilho-Salgadinha):
Cellia argyrotarsis ROB.-DESV... 16
Taeniorhynchus titillans WALK. ...21


[95]
Municipality of @(Saint Raymond Nonato)


Locations:
@(S. Raymundo Nonato):
Cellia argyritarsis ROB.-DESV.,. 80
Taeniarhynchus titillans WALK. .. 15
C. scapularis RDN................................. 3
@(Sta. Anna), @(Good View), @(Knights), @(Lage), @(Snail).
Cellia argyritarsis ROB.-DESV. . 50
Taeniorhynchus titillans WALK. _. 20
Taeniorhynchus juxta-mansonia
WOUNDS........................... 6


Municipality of @(Parnaguá) and @(Corrente)
Locations:


@(Parnaguá).
Cellia argyrotarsis, ROB.-DESV. . 38
Cellia. albimana WIED................. 4
Myzorhynchella lutzi, CRUZ........ 3
Taeniorhynchus titillans WALK. . 30
Taeniorhynchus juxta-mansonia
WOUNDS......................... 12
Culex n. sp.................................. 6
Cross, Ibiraba, Ipucra, Angical:
Cellia argyrotarsis ROB. DEV. . 30
Cellia albimana WIED.................. 2
Taeniorhynchus titillans WALK... 20
Taeniorhynchus juxta - mansonia
WOUNDS......................... 6


@(GOIAS)
Municipality of @(Duro).
Locations:


@(Hard).
Myzorhynchella lutzi, CRUZ.......... 20
C. argyritarsis ROB.-DESV.......... 12
Chagasia fajardoi. .............. 13


@(Souls), @(Boqueirão).
Myzorhynchella lutzi CRUZ........ 15
Cellia argyrotasris ROB.-DESV. . 8


Municipality of @(Natividade).
Locations:


@(Baiao), @(Extrema):
Cellia tarsiniaculata GOELDI ... 6
Cycloleppteron mediopunctatuni
THEO................................. 2
Cellia argyrotarsis, ROB.-DESV . 3
Culex scapularis RDN...................... 1
Melanoconion spissipes THEO. .. 1
Phoniomyia pallidiventer THEO. . . '
Sabethes albiprivatus, LUTZ........ 1
Sabelhoides purpureus TH EO.........í


Municipality of @(Porto Nacional).
Locations:


@(National Port).
Myzorhynchella parva CHAGAS . 10


@(Barreiros), @(Brejinho), @(Crixas), @(Alligator), @(Extrema):
Chagasia fajardoi LUTZ ............. 1
Myzorhynchella parva CHAGAS. . 7
Manguinhosia lutzi. CROSS.......... 8
Stethomyia nimba THEO................. . 5
Melanoconion spissipes, Ti IEO. . 1
Taeniorhynchus jasciolatus ARRIB. 1


Municipality of @(Pilar).
Locations:
1 @(Big Buriti), @(Closed Burity), @(Malhadinha):
Cellia brasiliensis CHAGAS.......... 42
Cellia tarsimaculata GOELDI. ... 4
Chagasia fajardoi LUTZ............. 1
Melanoconion humile THEO.......... 3
Sabethes longipes MACQ................ 2
Sabethes albiprivatus LUTZ.......... 4
Phoniomyia longircsiris THEO. .. 2
Sabelhoides confusus THEO. ... 1


Municipality of @(Goiás).
Locations:
@(Goias), @(Varjao), @(Mato Grosso).
Cycloleppitorum mediopunctatum
THEO................................. 3
Anopheles eiseni COQ.................. 1


[96]
Cellia argyrotarsis, ROB.-DESV... 9
Chagasia fajardoi LUTZ............. 1
Cellia brasiliensis CHAGAS......... 70
Cellia tarsimaculata GOELDL... 4
Culex faíigans WIED. (in homes in the Capital).
Melanoconion atratum THEO....... 15
Taeniorhynckus phaseiolatas A RR. .
Dendromyia personata LUTZ....... 3
Dendromyia paraensis THEO.... 3
Dendromyia oblita LUTZ............. 1
Sabethes albiprivatus LUTZ......... 11
Trichoprosopon compressam
LUTZ................................. 1
Sabethoides purpurais THEO.... 2


Triatoma
@(BAHIA)
Municipality of Remanso:
Triatoma sordida STAL ........... 1
Triatoma brasiliensis NEIVA........ 3
Joazeiro:
Triatoma sordida STAL............. 20


@(PERNAMBUCO)
Municipality of @(Petrolina):
Triatoma maculata ERICHSON.. 1


@(PIAUHY)


Municipality of @(Saint Raymond Nonato):
T. megista BURM.......................... 65
T. brasiliensis NEIVA.................. 20
T. maculata ERICH...................... 3
T. sordida STAL................................ 8
@(Parnaguá) and @(Current):
T. megista BURM.......................... 70
T. brasiliensis NEIVA.................. 2


@(GOIAS)
Municipality of @(Duro):
T. megista BURM....... .. ... 50
T. sordida STAL................................. 10
@(Port National) :
T megist BURM................................. 5
T. sordida STAL................................ 10
Municipalities of @(Natividade), @(Descoberto), @(Amaro Leite), @(Pilar), @(Goiás), @(Curralinho), @(Caldas Novas).
T. megista BURM...................... 160
T. sordida STAL................................. 11
Black flies and gnats. The determination of black flies, gnats and horseflies was made by Dr. ADOLPHO LUTZ, who was in charge of these studies at the Oswaldo Cruz Institute, and the remaining blood-sucking insects by NEIVA. The black flies we observed had spotted wings and therefore belonged to the genus Culicoides LATR. We collected some specimens in @(Pery-Pery) (@(Joazeiro) and many in Formosa on the banks of the @(Rio Preto). The species is Culicoides guttatus COQ., especially abundant in the morning; it attacks in full sun; in the afternoon it appears, however, with less frequency. In all the towns of the @(Rio Preto) the people call it “muruim”-, in the @(Tocantins) and tributaries there is, in some abundance, the Culicoides paraensis GOELDI; in this State the popular names for ceratopogonines are: “muruim”, “mosquito-mole”, “mosquito-pólvora” and “bembé”.
In the south, hematophagous dipterans are known as borrachudo, which in the Amazon region are called pilim and are representatives of the genus Simulium LATR.
In the areas we visited, the people call the simulidae mosquitoes; in the place called @(Veríssimo), near @(Descoberto), they give the simulidae the strange name of “promoter”, and the culicidae the name of muriçoca. In some places, the name of borrachudo is reserved for the nymphs and larvae of Triatomas. We only found 4 species of Simulidae and, due to the season, they were usually scarce; in the surroundings of @(Juazeiro) we were still able to collect some specimens; however, in places with running water, such as near @(Parnaguá), they were no longer present at the end of June, not even in the larval or nymphal stage, since all the research we did was fruitless.


[97]


Between Duro and Porto Nacional, in some places, there were enormous abundances of S. pruinosum LUTZ and omazonicum GOELDI, and the latter attacked humans and animals on all parts of the body, with the exception of the ears. In the place called Tabocas, we were able to observe both species before sunrise, forming veritable swarms; this occurred in the vicinity of the landing site, called Chupé, close to the left bank of the Tocantins. Even in places that were certainly more than 6 kilometers away from any running water, we were attacked by the simulidae, as happened in Pery-Pery (near Juazeiro).
The list of Tabanids records 35 species, including 10 new ones. Until @(Parnaguá), these Diptera were almost non-existent and only Neotabanus modestus WIED. or Esenbeckia ferruginea MACQ. could be seen, which began to be abundant in Formosa; Chrysops modestus was also found along almost the entire route. The drought was already severe and this explains the scarcity of Tabanids; in @(Tanque) @(S. Raymundo Nonato) we were told about a “mole horsefly”, which according to the description must be Selasoma tibiale WIED., which we had already verified in Piauí in specimens brought from Urussahy by &(Dr. GAVIÃO PEIXOTO). In the “gerals” the horseflies began to appear in greater abundance and among them a Diachlorus that attacks humans; For the first time, Chlorotabanus mexicanus L. appears. Our experience with this species in the different parts of Brazil where we have found it supports the hypothesis that the larvae develop in swamps or waterlogged places, and in the excursion now reported, this fact was entirely confirmed. In the headwaters of the Rio Preto, we found Lepidoselaga paradoxa in great numbers; it attacks in full sun, disappearing at dusk; at first glance, this tabanid resembles the bee of the genus Melipona ILL.
In general, there are dry regions, commonly called plateaus; in several of them we were attacked by clouds of Chrysops parvifascia LUTZ, in numbers never observed by us; this chrysopine accumulated there in order to feed on cattle or wild animals; in one of these plateaus, which measured 42 kilometers in width, we were able to verify that the chrysopines were only present at a maximum distance of 8 kilometers from the entrance; from then on they disappeared completely, to reappear in the same abundance at the same distance from the exit.
In @(Goiás) the fauna of these dipterans is more abundant and in some places T. mucronatus is very common; this species has the particularity of leaving the part where it sucked bleeding profusely; probably with the bite they inoculate some anticoagulant liquid, like leeches; this horsefly attacks humans. The Esenbeckia ferruginea, while sucking, beats its wings very quickly, perhaps to aid the suction. We have never been able to verify the presence of Poecilosoma cincreum (WIED.) attacking animals or people and the only specimen captured was on the head of a jabiru (Mycteria L.), killed by gunshot; when this bird fell, we saw that 3 horseflies of the same species tried to suck its neck, but we only managed to catch one of them.
In some places, the common people called the pangonines “ferrão horsefly”; the chrysopines are better known and the names vary, according to the state and even the localities. Thus, we hear the representatives of the genus Chrysops MEIG. called “mutuca rajada”, “mutuquinha”, “mutuca maringá”, “mutuca carijó”, “mutuca de cavalo” and even “cabo verde”, a name that in the south is applied to Lepidoselaga lepidota WIED.; in some places in @(Goiás) Chrysops costatus FABR. is known by the name “mutuca de natal”.
The study of these dipterans is of great importance, as they are most likely the transmitters of the disease of chairs, present throughout the area covered.
The culicidean fauna of the dry zone is certainly represented by few species and,


[98]
Although the research was undertaken at an inappropriate time, the statement is accurate.
In the surroundings of @(Juazeiro), besides C. argyritarsis RGB. DESV., we only found the classic domestic mosquitoes: St. ta'opus MEIG. and C. fatigans WIED.; in the caatingas only Janthinosoma discruciatis WALK.
Up to Parnaguá, our collection was only increased by a few specimens of C. albimana and Culex scapularis; on the banks of the lakes in this municipality we found abundant representatives of the genus Taeniorhynchus ARR.
We were once again able to verify the influence of light on the appearance of anophelines; at dusk, abundant representatives of the genera Cellia theo. and Taeniorhynchus appeared; during the day, however, in the shady thickets of the lagoon, it was easy to catch Celliae, but never Taeniorhynchus, which require greater obscurity. Anopheline larvae were collected in great abundance and we are inclined to suppose that, in these parts, the phenomenon of drought must occur to a very marked degree.
The mosquitoes were probably in the larval stage and phenomena of this nature have already been observed in semi-desert regions of @(Mexico).
Cellia albimana, when present, was always in small numbers; the foci are formed by any collection of water, even in impressions left by the feet of cattle, in marshy lands, on the banks of lakes, a fact, in fact, already recorded in Algeria by the &(SERGENT brothers). We raised from larvae found in the @(Parnaguá lagoon) a non-hematophagous Culex, the exact identification of which we have not yet made.
In certain areas of Bahia and Piauí, anophelines are called “sovela” by the people to differentiate them from the common mosquitoes, which are known as “muriçocas”. The abundance of anophelines easily explains the development of malaria, mainly on the banks of rivers and lakes in those areas.
In the "general areas", where water is more abundant and vegetation is thicker, other species began to appear and, for the first time, we were able to observe Stethomyia THEO. in freedom and study its habits. At first glance, this anopheline resembles the representatives of the genus Wyeomyia THEO. in its way of flying and landing; they fly with their hind legs facing their heads and appear to suck before any other anopheline; they never land on the abdomen of animals like Manguinhosia CRUZ, also very abundant in buriti palm groves; they prefer to land on the hips and legs. We continue to believe that this species does not transmit malaria. Manguinhosia increases in number at dusk, when Stethomyia nimba disappears.
The plains are practically uninhabited and Cellia argyrotarsis and albimana are scarce there; this fact is in agreement with the observation of some North American authors, who state that these species are practically the only transmitters of malaria in the intertropical regions of @(America), as they are only present in populated places.
In the buriti palm groves, located 80 kilometers from the banks of the @(Rio Preto), we found for the first time Chagasia fajardoi, a species that does not stray far from its breeding ground, as is the case with Stethomyia; this constitutes yet another element in favor of the belief that we have that these anophelines do not transmit malaria.
Further on, we were attacked in broad daylight by swarms of anophelines; this habit immediately betrays Cellia brasiliensis, the only Brazilian species that attacks in full sun; the terrain was very similar to the fields of @(Avanhandava) @(São Paulo), where we observed this species for the first time. If the possibility of C. brasiliensis transmitting malaria is demonstrated, it will constitute, due to its habit of attacking during the day, a serious obstacle to the future settlement of the regions where it exists. Here we also verified the fact, already recorded by us in another study, of the constant and simultaneous presence of


[99]
Manguinhosia lutzi and Cellia braziliensis.
We found Myzorhynchella lutzi just before the banks of the @(Rio das Areias) near @(Duro), in @(Goiás); in the surroundings of this village, the only culicidae found are Chagasia fajardoi, Manguinhosia lutzi, C. argyrotarsis and albimana, although in small numbers, which is in agreement with the observations of the residents, who claim that malaria is almost unknown.
At the end of August, at @(Pedra Furada), we caught the first specimen of Cyclolepteron mediopunctatiun. In fact, we were surprised by the poverty of the culicidian fauna of @(Goiás), since not even common species appeared, such as Culex scapularis, abundant from @(Mexico) to @(Argentina). We spent several days without being able to increase our collections with species other than C. argyrofarsis and albimana; the latter, as we moved south, replaced the former, already rare in the vicinity of @(Descoberto), where, in a place called @(Lagoa Grande), we were tormented all night by C. albimana and Myzorhynehella lutzi. The fact that the chase lasted for so many hours can be explained by the fact that it was a moonlit night, which confirms the following:
our observation, made in Xerém for this purpose; in fact the aggression becomes greater when the moonlight is covered by clouds, reducing the clarity and approaching the twilight luminosity, whose luminous intensity represents the optimum for some anophelines.
From @(Descoberto) to the south, Cellia argyrotarsis disappears, being replaced exclusively by C. albimana, which is probably the transmitter of malaria in @(Araguaya), since it was the predominant species in a landing about 100 kilometers from this river. We collected some Sabethes DESV. and a Chagasia and continue to find it strange the absence of C. scapularis ROND. and serratus THEO., so common throughout @(Brazil).
Already near the @(Capital of Goiás), in the only forest that truly deserves this name in the entire region we traveled, we caught 2 specimens of Anopheles eiseni, a species we had observed in the wild for the first time; until then the only Brazilian state where it was known to exist was @(Minas); this fact is quite curious due to the circumstance that it is a species found in some republics of @(Central America); in addition to this species we also captured specimens of Cycloleppteron, Sabethinae, Dendromyinae etc.: no specimen of Culicinae was seen, which we found quite strange.
In 3500 kilometers of travel, only 30 species of culicidae were observed; of these, 10 are anophelinae, leaving only 5 missing to complete the total of Brazilian species of this subfamily.
The absence of Myzomyia lutzi is easily explained by the lack of dendritic bromeliads that retain water and whose presence was only verified in a small stretch of the route; the larva of this anopheline only develops in those plants. We found no explanation for the absence of Arribalzagaia maculipes and pscudomaculipes and Cycloleppteron intermedium, always present in the localities where Cycloleppteron mediopunctatum lives. The remaining species, Anopheles mattogrossensis, has so far only been found in the state that gave it its name. The entire interior of Brazil, except for the towns on the banks of the São Francisco and Preto rivers, does not have Stegomyia calopus and Culex fatigans. The cities of Porto Nacional and Goiás, for the time being, remain free of these culicides.
Triatomas – From @(Juazeiro) to the vicinity of @(São Raimundo Nonato), we searched in vain for T. megista (BURM.), which transmits CHAGAS disease; in that city we were only able to obtain T. sordida (STAHL), which was already suspected due to the great affinity between this species and watercourses. In this respect, the excursion in question was very instructive for the study of the biology of T. sordida, a species widely distributed in @(South America) and already proven to transmit CHAGAS disease.
As soon as we entered arid regions, T. sordida disappeared, immediately reappearing


[100]
in the vicinity of watercourses and in some places where CHAGAS disease was present, such as @(Porto Nacional), the 7* sordida was the only species observed. In addition to this species, from @(Juazeiro) to the vicinity of the village @(São Raimundo Nonato), we only found T. rnaculata (ERICH.), called in some places "black wall bug" to distinguish it from the generic name "wall bug", given in almost the entire area to representatives of the genus Triatoma; in @(Juazeiro), it is still called "chupa" and in some localities of @(Pernambuco), @(Piauí) and @(Bahia) "bicudo" and "procotó".
Near @(São Raimundo Nonato), on the farm called @(Santa Anna), we verified the presence of Triatoma brasiliensis NEIVA, infesting the holes of the mocós (Cérodon rupestris WIED.) and further on, in more than one place, we learned that the same thing happens with T. megista. However, we did not have the opportunity to resolve this important issue, which is easy to admit, since the domestication of some triatomes certainly occurred after the discovery of Brazil.
In the village of @(São Raimundo Nonato) we found the following species infesting homes: T. brasiliensis, maculata, sordida and megista, the first in large numbers, the last very scarcely.
Repeated tests to determine whether there was a trypanosome infection had so far been completely negative; about 12 kilometers west of the village of @(São Raimundo Nonato), we found, in the place called @(Lages), Triatoma megista, represented exclusively in extraordinary numbers; we are unable to explain the cause of the sudden disappearance of the other species. From then on, this species predominated, to the exclusion of any other, until we reached @(Parnaguá village), when T. sordida reappeared, which, associated with T. megista or alone, was found in almost the entire territory of Goiás until we reached the border with @(Minas).
In @(Parnaguá) we found the first T. megista, infected with Trypanosoma cruzi CHAGAS, and this fact confirmed the clinically based suspicions that CHAGAS disease was already "appearing", that is, it was already appearing sporadically, according to those areas.
The common name of triatomes has a wide synonymy, varying from one place to another; in addition to those mentioned, the nymph or larva is called cascudo and borrachudo, names that, in the south, correspond to the simulidae and certain coleoptera; the adult is still called "fincão", from Gerais onwards; including the whole of @(Goiás), the triatoma is called "percevejo", "percevejão", "percevejo gauderio" and "vum-vum", a name used only in @(Capital of Goiás); in the south of this State it is known by the names "chupão" and "chupança" and in the vicinity of @(Minas) as "barbeiro".
In the areas in question, Cimex lectularius (FABR.) is called by various names: "bedbug from @(Bahia), bedbug from commerce", "end-end". We have never observed triatornas inhabiting the forest, despite numerous statements to the contrary; whenever they brought us from the forest hemiptera, considered by the people who collected them to be legitimate "wall bugs", we found that they were representatives of the genera Apiomerus HALN., Hammatocerus BURM., Pachylis LEP. SENV. etc. In the corrals, under the bark of the fence posts, it is relatively common to find the same triatomes that frequent the house.
In places where there is the simultaneous presence of mocós and goats, the latter seek to sleep near the burrows of those rodents, thus serving as pasture for Triatorna brasiliensis.
T. rnaculata does not appear to spread very far, as it has not been found beyond the village of @(São Raimundo Nonato); T. brasiliensis infests homes in @(Parnaguá village), together with T. sordida and megista, and is found as far away as @(S. Marcello).
Almost all homes along the route offered all the conditions to allow the reproduction of triatomes;


[101]
Most of them are made up of adobe houses, not plastered or only in some compartments; in a place called “Tombador”, on the border of @(Piauí) with the municipality of @(Santa Rita), we found a house completely covered with straw, but so densely that it allowed the existence of triatomes; in general, in houses poorly covered with straw and with walls covered by them incompletely, the triatomes, when they penetrate them carried by the loads, do not find conditions for reproduction.
From @(Duro) onwards, only the presence of T. megista and sordida was verified; in some places, the inhabitants reported that the rats were incessantly hunting these hemipterans, to the point of extinguishing them; in general, the resident tries to deny the existence of triatomas in the home where he lives, and, when he recognizes the presence of the hematophagous reduvida in the place where he lives, it is never in his own house, but in someone else's.
However, a quick investigation through the cracks in the walls is often enough to judge the existence of triatomes by the stains that their excrement leaves at the entrance to the places where they shelter.
Snakes, as everywhere else, enjoy enormous prestige and are greatly feared; practically the people do not know snakes and any of these reptiles are considered poisonous; on our excursion we managed to bring back the following collection, determined by Dr. J. FLORENCE GOMES of the Butantã Institute:
Crotalus terrificae (LAUR) (rattlesnake)
Lachesis lanceolatus (LACEP.) (Jararaca)
Xenodon merremii (WAGL) (Salamanta)
Oxyrhopus trigeminus D. & B.
Oxyrhopus cloelia (DAUD.) (mussurana)
Spilotes pullatus (L.) (caninana).
Under this name, Phrynoiiax sulphureus (WAGL.) is still known in @(Brazil); both species are not poisonous.
In addition to these, we found Elaps marcgravii WIED., Herpetodryas carinatus (L.), Drymobius bifossatus (RAD.) and Philodryas olfersi (LICHT.); probably based on the determination we made with the elements we had on our trip. Most of these species were collected in @(Piauí), and other species that occur there can be added to the list, according to information from &(Dr. FLORENCIO GOMES), when studying material recently collected in that State by &(Mr. F. IGLESIAS):
VIPERIDAE:
Lachesis neuwiedii (WAGL.)
COLUBRIDAE:
Aglypha:
Leptophis ahaetulla (L.)
Liophis poecilogyrus (WIED.)
Liophis viridis GTHR.
Rhadinaea occipitalis JAN.
Rhadinaea genimaculaia BOETTGER
Helicops angulatus (L.), water snake.
Opisthoglypha:
Leptodira albifusca (LACEP.)
Oxyrhopus guerini DUM. & BIBR.
Oxybelis acuminatus (WIED)
Homalocranium melanocephalum (L.)
According to what Dr. F. GOMES reported, Lachesis neuwiedii from Piauí differs slightly from the specimens from @ (Southern Brazil), but not specifically, according to our informant. We believe that the species in question is only found in the north of the state, since in the southern part, which was the only part we visited, we obtained no information about the existence of such a characteristic snake. Throughout the northeast, at every step, one hears terrible references about the power of the venom of the “salamanta”, a snake said to live in the hollows of trees and whose name is evidently a corruption of salamander. Under this name, people confuse two very different species: Corallus hortulanus (L.) and Xenodon merremii (WAGL.)
The salamanta, however, is not a poisonous snake and the terror inspired must come from the appearance that the snake takes, flattening itself against the ground when it sees any enemy, which earned it the indigenous name of boipeva as it is still known in @(south of Brazil); the specimen we brought was collected in the surroundings of @(village of Parnaguá), where it also


[102]
We caught Elaps corallinus WIED. Through information we learned of the existence of one of the Lachesis called by the people “Jararacuissú”, which seems to be rarer there than in the rest of the country. A very noteworthy fact is the non-existence of Lachesis matas (L), the common surucucú, common and frequent in @(northern Brazil); all the inquiries we made proved useless, and there is no probability of a mistake, since it is one of the most characteristic snakes and has already been recorded as being present in some states we visited, such as @(Bahia). It is possible that L. mutus does not find favorable living conditions in dry areas, existing only in forested areas; our experience in this respect speaks in favor of this assertion, since the only living specimen of this species that we had the opportunity to see was captured by us in @(Xerém) @(E. do Rio) in a very humid and forested area.
The “mussurana” of such utility is, in some places in @(Piauí) and @(Bahia), called the “black snake” and feared by most people who consider it a ferocious jararacussu. In @(Parnaguá) we had the opportunity to come across a large specimen of the Coluber corais BOIE, the common “papa-pinto” of certain Brazilian states, a very useful snake, because it is ophiophagous, a fact however still ignored by almost everyone. Our excursion companion, the son of a local farmer, upon seeing the reptile, before we could warn him, shot it to death, convinced that it was a very venomous snake. The information provided about venomous snakes is unfortunately very suspect; however, we must record what we heard in a place called @(Jatobá) (@Municipality of Remanso), @(Bahia), referring to a small green snake, dendrophylla, which is said to be venomous.
Science has already recorded Lachesis bilineatus (WIED), commonly known as saracucá patioba, as a green poisonous snake, inhabiting the @ (northern Brazil); it is not impossible that the fact narrated by the inhabitants of Jatobá is related to this species.
However, Crotalus terrificus (LAUR.) is responsible for most cases of snakebite in humans and animals; in the south of Brazil, this role falls to Lachesis lanceolatus LACEP.; on this point, popular information is true: there is an enormous abundance of rattlesnakes in the northeast of Brazil, and their frequency increases in dry areas. Anyone who has to travel through uninhabited areas of these regions must take anti-crotalic serum, prepared by the Butantã Institute.
In every municipality of @(Formosa) @(Bahia) travelers often hear references to a small, venomous snake, according to information, the rattlesnake, called “tira-peia”; it lives in cracks in the ground and commonly appears in the “green”; it looks like a rattlesnake, but does not grow much longer than a hand’s breadth. The name is given due to the violence of its venom; as is known, in the north animals are restrained so that they do not escape, and the expression “tira-peia” comes to designate the uselessness of this restraining instrument for the bitten animal. Perhaps this is a confusion with some representative of the harmless Amphisbaenidae family that is found throughout @(Brazil) because it is a snake and, what is more, very venomous.
Honestly, we do not give any credit to what we heard in @(Formosa), despite it having been repeated to us by several people and in several locations; we report it only because we have a duty to record information that is always useful to science, which destroys or confirms it. In this region, the inhabitants also refer to snakes called “malha” or “malha de cascavel” and “jararaca de cabo branco”, which they say are poisonous; some of these names in the South refer to the common jararaca.
Throughout @(Goiás) people no longer talk about the minhocão, a legendary reptile that has been treated by several naturalists; some people have heard references to the animal, but, without a doubt, the legend is disappearing; on the other hand, however, it is probably being replaced by another, because in @(Ouro Fino) we hear the reference to a snake that walks like oligochaetes in general (“it walks like a worm” as people say)


[103]
and is called “surucucu”, reaching just over a meter, gray in color and with a body covered in flat scales, being extremely rare.
The rhea (Rhea americanan L.) and the seriema (Macrodactylus cristatus L.) are considered snake killers in @(Caracol) @(Piauí). &(Colonel AURELIANO AUGUSTO DIAS) prohibits the hunting of rheas on the farms he owns, because he believes that these birds destroy the snakes. In the autopsies of a rhea and several seriemas that died during the excursion, we never found the presence of snakes in their digestive tracts. An animal that also enjoys the reputation of being a snake killer is the tegu (Tupinambis teguixin L.); we never had the opportunity to witness any of the fights that are so common among the people. According to the observations of &(Dr. VITAL BRAZIL) and his assistants, the seriema, jabim, peacock and certain hawks only devour snakes.
non-venomous and non-aggressive or venomous when very small; these facts were observed experimentally after fasting for 2-3 days. The tegu or lizard, according to information from the same observers, never attacks venomous snakes, but attacks and devours non-venomous snakes.
A fact to be noted among reptiles is the name given in @(Piauí) to the representatives of the genus Iguana DAUD, known there by the name of “sloth”; in fact, the representatives of the genus Bradypus L., universally known by this name, do not exist there.
These notes do not always follow the zoological order; they are written as we read our diary and notes made during the trip; but the collection of the different parts may give an idea of the fauna of the areas we visited. In the dry zone, as expected, hydrosaurians are rare; we only managed to shoot an alligator in the @(Ibiraba lagoon), in the municipality of @(Parnaguá). Among the amphibians, the only common species is Leptodactylus ocellatus (L.), commonly known there as “gia”, and the Bufonidae are well represented; however, we did not find any representatives of the Hylidae in the entire semi-arid region.
Just as the buriti palm grove is home to almost all species of local flora, lakes, dams and ipueiras attract birdlife from many leagues around; a large number of species are found exclusively in these places.
Herons, irerês, teals and ducks are relatively common in larger bodies of water; their abundance is rarely great and this, in some way, surprised us, given the constant information to the contrary.
A constant element in any water collection is the “téu-téu” (Belonopterus cayennensis GM.); the name of lagoon in the @ (northeast) designates a collection of water of any depth and extension over 20 meters; when there is depth and the extension greatly exceeds the width, it is called ipueira or ipuera; dams in general are called tanks. In the larger lagoons, in addition to the téu-téu, the Theristicus caudatus (BODD.) is frequent and in the ipuêras, under the local name of socó-boi, the Tigrisoma lincatum (BODD.) also appears. Only one specimen of the Florida caerulea L. was seen during the entire route; but if the blue heron is so rare, the same does not happen with the Herodias egretta (GM.), which we were able to observe, near any body of water and, in large flocks, on Ilha Pequena in the Parnaguá lagoon, the place where we saw the largest number of birds during the entire journey, because, in flocks, we also found the Ajaja ajaja (L.), the spoonbill and the Cancroma cochlearia L., the arapapá, in that area called the wide-billed socó.
After the municipality of @(Corrente) @(Piauí) the lagoons are frequented even more by the carauna, Harpiprion cayennensis (GM.).
In the southwest of Piauí, blue macaws began to appear; until then we had only found the blue-and-yellow macaw (Ara ararauna L.). As we moved westward, the hyacinth macaw (Anodorhynchus hyacinthinus (LATH.) became more abundant; in the region in question, the “blue macaw” is fortunately still very common.


[104]
and, as the biology of this species is flawed, we will give the results of our observations and the information gathered.
Flocks of up to 5 are not rare, but they generally fly in pairs; their flight is very fast and they squawk differently from the canindé. After a few days of practice, when you hear the macaw squawking, you can easily tell what species it is. They land in the buriti palm groves where they usually sleep; on one occasion, up to 3 specimens of hyacinth macaw were shot; there are very few.
parasitized. We have observed the Hyacinth Macaw in the process of nesting on several occasions, and for this purpose it always chooses a leafless buriti palm tree (Mauritia vinifera MART.); during the month of August, the nest begins to open; on 26-8-12, in a place called @(São José) @(Municipality of Pilar), State of @(Goiás), we cut down a dry buriti tree, but it revealed the presence of a macaw nest, by its tail; the nest was already prepared, but it did not contain eggs. From the information we learned that there are 3 eggs and they are white; we were told that these beautiful birds are much persecuted by the harpy eagle (Thrasaetus harpya (L.'); we believe, however, that the persecution does not produce much effect, since this eagle seems to be very rare in the area where it exists, according to the information.
The first references to the crested hawk were heard only in @ (Goiás); we were never able to observe it flying, but its presence is undeniable, since we saw and brought claws, kept as amulets by hunters. In general, the inhabitants do not know where they nest; only one individual told us that the nests are built without any care in the cachopa of the buriti palm, that is, in the part of the palm tree that bears the leaves; it lays 2 eggs between the months of September and November. Several farmers assert that the crested hawk attacks the “minjolo” calves, which often die as a result of the injuries received; deer chicks, curassows, seriemas and armadillos are prey, easily carried away by the bird. As soon as the presence of the crested hawk is reported near the farmer's home, he immediately tries to hunt it, afraid that the children will be injured; more than once we heard the story of attempted aggressions of this kind and &(Dr. AYRES DA SILVA) told us about an episode that happened with a relative of his, in which he had the opportunity to kill a crested hawk, at the time when the bird was attacking a boy who was with him.
Up to @(Goiás) only two species of vultures are found, Catharista attractas brasiliensis (BONAP.), the common vulture and the “red-headed vulture” {Cathartes aura (L.), the latter predominating in the most central part of the country; it is very easy to differentiate the two species by flying, due to the masterful flight of Cathartes aura, which soars for a long period of time, performing marvelous gliding flights.
In @(Goiás), in addition to the species mentioned, the (Gypagus papa L.) is relatively common, and regarding this bird we have verified a true popular observation; we want to refer to the fact that other vultures make carrion after the king vulture has eaten its fill. Once we found a dead cow and a huge flock of vultures around it, perched on nearby trees; as the place was uninhabited, we were surprised that the corpse was not attacked, although we observed that some vultures were walking over the animal's body without trying to feed; a friend warned us that this was because a king vulture was nearby, and, in fact, soon after we verified the presence of 5 of these birds perched on the highest tree nearby and that they prevented the other vultures from attacking the cattle.
In the place called @(Baião), municipality of @(Natividade), farmers guarantee the existence of another species of vulture called locally “urubú-pedrez and urubú-fidalgo” it is, according to the information, a smaller bird than the Gypagus papa but larger than the other vultures; it has a black and white striped head, not being a rare body.


[105]
We are inclined to believe in the veracity of this information, due to the fact that we shot a certain vulture that was eating a deer and whose size caught our attention.
On two occasions, in @(Goiás), we verified the presence of Mycteria mycteria (LICHT), the great jabiru; the first time while flying and the other when it was feeding in a lagoon. When it sensed people approaching, it tried to take flight, which it did with difficulty; the shot hit it on one of its wings and it fell, defending itself valiantly. Its digestive tract contained only fish. Unlike the vultures that provided us with excellent parasitological material, the jabiru showed nothing. On the banks of the rivers and lagoons all along the route to the central region of @(Goiás), it is common to find the interesting Tyrannida, Fluvicola climazura (VIELL), known from the capital of @(Bahia) by the common name of “lavadeira”.
Those interested in the birdlife of the regions covered may consult the following modern works: REISER, O.: “Liste der Vogelarten, welche auf der, von der Kaiserl Akademie der Wissenschafleu 1903 nach Nordostbrasilien entsandten Expedition, unter Leitung des Hofrates &(Dr. F. STEINDACHNER). gesammelt wurden. Vienna. Denkschriften der K. Akademie der wissenschaften, Vol. 470 — 1910 and HELLMAYR, CE: An account of the birds collected by Mons. GA BAER in the State of @(Goiás), @(Brazil).” Novitates Zoologicae, Vol. XV, 1909 London.
By &(HOLLAND, J.) &(WHASEMANN, DJ) and &(EIGENMANN, H. C). In Vol. VII of “Annals of the Carnegie Museum, 1911, there are 3 articles that extend from pp. 283-328 and that deal exclusively with the ichthyological fauna of the @(Northeast) region. &(HASEMANN) who was the naturalist who traveled the region, studies in detail the various methods of fishing, including the tiguinagem employed by the natives. Those interested may with great profit consult the indicated work that deals exhaustively with the subject.
In the @(Parnaguá) lagoon, a certain species of small shrimp is very abundant, probably belonging to the Palaemon genus, but whose exact specific identification has not been made, as we have not collected specimens ♂♂
Very recently &(R. VON IHERING) published in the “Anais Paulistas de Medicina e Cir." an interesting article. “The species of house rats and their differentiation from indigenous rats”, with curious information on the subject, some of which we may have collected in connection with the Mus (Epimys) norwegicus ERXL, which recently invaded, not 8 years ago, the homes of Central Brazil, causing the usual depredations. The name of the rat, however, is unknown, and the rodent is called “leather-tailed rat” and in Pernambuco and certain areas of @(Piauí) the residents believe that the invasion came from @(Cariri) @(Ceará).
It only brought the advantage of hunting wall-dwelling insects, but on the other hand, it digs galleries in the basement of houses and "furunches" (holes) the entire house, as the locals say. In the center of @(Goiás) the inhabitants complain about the cattle rat, also a recent invasion and which differs from the leather-tailed rat in that it has a hairy tail.
The houses in these areas are frequented by small native rats, known as catita, punaré, tucunaré, and probably belonging to several genera. On the borders of @(Piauí) and @(Bahia), at night, when we were already camping, we had the opportunity to kill a young specimen of Rhipidomys pyrrhorhinus (WIED.), according to the identification made by &(Dr. A. DE MIRANDA RIBEIRO).
The cattle rat from the center of @(Goiás), from the description given to us, must most likely be Thrichomys apereoides (LUND.); we found it frequenting the homes of @(Vila de Parnaguá) @(Piauí). &(MIRANDA RIBEIRO) who identified the specimen, which we brought from there, also found it in a home, on the left bank of the @(Paraguay). The species


[106]
in question, has a huge area of dissemination in @(Brazil), becoming increasingly frequent in the homes of our #backlands.
The “leather tail”, as it is also called by abbreviation, has not yet invaded the municipality of @(Parnaguá); the locations, such as @(Lages), @(Caracol), etc. still belonging to the municipality of @(São Raimundo Nonato), are not yet aware of the plague.
The capybara (Hydrochoerus capybara ERX.) only exists in the surroundings of @(Parnaguá village)
onwards; not even in the towns on the banks of the @(São Francisco River), which we visited, is this large rodent found, having existed in the past, according to what we were told. From @(Petrolina) to the aforementioned location, the animal is completely unknown and this fact is of great importance, since the “torce” (chair disease) exists throughout the area, and therefore the capybara is unnecessary as a depository for the vinyls of this trypanosome.
In the @(Parnaguá) lagoon, capybaras are found in great abundance; however, residents have never observed any deaths of capybaras, which would lead to suspicion of an epizootic caused by Trypanosoma equinum VOGES, as has already been verified in @(Brazil), @(Argentina) and @(Paraguay).
Capybara meat is used for food and its oil is also used to cure tuberculosis. In the rocky areas of Bahia, Piauí and even Goiás, near Natividade, one can find the Kerodon rupestris WIED (mocó), whose meat is considered a fine delicacy. These rodents seek to inhabit rocky burrows near water. The cavy (Cavia aperea ERXL) is quite common throughout the area. In Caracol we had the opportunity to capture alive the Conepatus suffocans AZARA, known in the northeast by the name of cangambá. We never supposed that it was the anal secretion that the animal expels in order to defend itself, so nauseating; the naturalist who determined it did not exaggerate in giving it that name.
The animal was surprised during the day, which is rare, as it is a nocturnal animal. It hid in the hollow of an umburana tree from where it was forcibly removed, defending itself terribly with greenish ejaculations thrown from a distance, which drove away the dogs and forced more than one person to abandon the fight; a comrade, who had tried the hardest to get the animal out of its shelter, had to lie down completely nauseated. Two days later the animal was killed with chloroform, and several rare parasites unknown to science were collected from it. A large quantity of dark yellow oily liquid was removed from the rectal gland and stored in ampoules sealed with a lamp. The substance that gives the secretion its characteristic repellent smell is ethyl sulfhydrate, better known by the name of mercaptan. When the ejaculations are repeated, vapors are noticed to form. Already &(AYRES DE CAZAL), in Corografia Brazilica, T. 1. 2nd ed., page 50, Rio, 1833, refers to the fact as follows: “Some people say they have observed a small greenish smoke at the rear of the gunner when he fires the piece”; the fact of the emission of greenish vapors, we can assure, is completely true.
At the bottom of the gland there is a thick deposit, greenish in color, with the repugnant odor of oil. &(VON IHERING, H.) proposed for the species from @(northern Brazil), the name Conepatus chilensis DESM., var. bahiensis (see Revista do Museu Paulista, Vol. VII) - “Os Mamíferos do @(Brasil Meridional)” pp. 147-272 cj. pag. 357.)
Monkeys are relatively rare, even representatives of the Hapalidae; in a place called @(Angico) (Municipality of @(Parnaguá), we came across some flocks of black howler monkeys, but with the back of their hands covered in yellowish hairs (Alonata belzebue L.) and in @(Goiás) with a large flock of Cebus. The dead specimens provided a large amount of parasitic material, mainly worms, some of which are being studied. We prefer to identify the howler monkey found in the Municipality of @(Parnaguá) as Alonata belzebul (L.), to follow the authority of &(TROUESSART), who, in his “Catalogus Mammalium”, considers A. discolor (SPIX) and A. rufimanus (KUHL) as synonyms of Alonata belzebul (L.)


[107]
However, it seems that the issue is not completely resolved, as in October
1910 was published in The Annals & Mag. of natural History S. 8. Vol. VI. pp. 422-424 an article entitled “A note on Alonata discolor of Spix” and signed by &(G. DOLLMANN), where the author, regarding a series of howler monkeys received from E. de @(Maranhão), tries to separate A. belzebul and A. discolor into two distinct species, based on differences found, not only in the skin, but also
still in the bones of the head.
Already &(MARCGRAV) page 226 of Book VI deals with the species in question as present
in @(Pernambuco).
Months after these lines were written, an article by &(H. von HERING) appeared in mid-October 1914 in Vol. IX, pp. 231-256 of the “Revista do Museu Paulista”, entitled “Os Bugios do gênero Alonata” (The Howler Monkeys of the Alonata Genus), in which the illustrious author resolves the controversies on the subject. &(HERING) refutes &(DOLLMANN)’s article and recognizes that A. discolor (SPlX) and A. straminea (GEOFFR.) are synonyms of A. belzebul (L.). The print gives in color the geographic distribution of the species of the Alonata LAC. genus; it is with pleasure that we see the region of Piauí inhabited by A. belzebul, thus confirming the identification, which we made, of the species found there.
In early 1915, “Appendix No. 5” (Zoology) of the Strategic Telegraph Lines Commission from Mato Grosso to Amazonas was published; in which the most authoritative Brazilian zoologist, Mr. A. Miranda Ribeiro, gives an account of the mammals found in the area covered by the Rondou Commission. On page 5 of this work, the illustrious naturalist places howler monkeys in the genus Cebus ERX, based on the principle of strict priority, since, according to him, the species Belzebul and Seniculus were the first to be cited by Erxleben when he created his genus Cebus.
Only in @(Goiás) can we find material from tapirs, which are still very abundant in that state; the meat is only used for the docks, while the leather is highly sought after for various purposes. The locals distinguish two species, one called “gameleira” is larger and lighter, with white ear tips in both sexes from birth; the other, called “xurê” is smaller, darker in color, and more courageous; however, the information does not always agree on the color of the “xuré tapir”, which for some is more yellow than the “gameleira”.
The specimen we killed belonged to this type, with dimensions worthy of note: length 1.82 m, height 1.05 m; thoracic circumference 1.25 m, weight 170 kilograms. The weight should be taken approximately, more or less, because the scales we used, owned by a farmer, had uncalibrated pieces of iron as weights, which made one suspect their accuracy.
To date, science has only recorded one species of tapir in Brazil, the Tapirus americanas BRISSON, but in Colombia, Ecuador and Peru there is the Tapirus pinchaque ROULIN and in Central America a subgenus with two species: Tapirus (Tapirella) bairdi GILL and Tapirus (Tapirella) dowi GILL. More detailed studies on the subject may prove true the observation, long recorded by hunters, of the existence of another species of tapir in Brazilian territory. From Petrolina to the Bahian plains, the tapir is a completely unknown animal. From the plains onwards it is very abundant.
Among the edentata, the most common are the Armadillo novemcinctus (L.) (armadillo) and the Tolypeutes tricinctus (L.) (three-banded armadillo), whose tasteless meat is considered to be the best game in the dry zone. In @(Goiás) we were often told about the abundance of the giant armadillo (Prodontes giganteus E. GEOFFR.), but, in our opinion, it is a rare species in that State; in @(Baião), in the municipality of @(Natividade), we asked the farmer, an intelligent man, if the species in question existed in the area. “There are too many,” he replied. “How many have you killed? We asked.” To tell the truth, Doctor, to this day, at 58 years of age, I have only seen one.


[108]
Popular information must be controlled, otherwise it is useless to take advantage of it; armadillos enjoy the reputation of destroying snakes and despite this belief being very common, we do not give it credit.
Another belief that is very popular there is that armadillos feed on corpses; in fact, on several occasions, we have observed graves with holes, probably dug by these mammals; the fact is so widespread that many people refrain from using them as food, out of understandable repugnance. The biology of Dasypodidae is still little known; however, given the recent publication of &(NEWMANN, HH), The natural History of the Nine-Banded Armadillo of Texas & in the American Naturalist Vol. XLVII, No. 561 pp. 513-39, Sept. 1913), which constitutes the most complete work ever done on a species of that family, the accusation made against them should not be rejected without studying the matter. &(NEWMANN) does not refer to the fact, but, when dealing with feeding, he demonstrates that the armadillo has an enormous voracity that was unknown to us before reading his work, and, as the Texas species constitutes only a variety of our Dasypus novemcinctus, the findings that the author reached can, in all probability, be generalized to the Brazilian armadillo.
Among the myrmecophagidae we were only able to capture two specimens of the small Tamandua tetradactyla L, in the south of @(Piauí) called "mixila." and in some places of @(Goiás) called "meleta"; according to the information, the large anteater does not exist in the areas visited.
Large felines are rare near towns, but from @(Parnaguá) onwards, they appear in great abundance, mainly in certain districts in the north of @(Goiás), causing damage to livestock; the hides no longer have great commercial value, not only because they are generally poorly tanned, but also because of the damage caused by the primitive weapons used by hunters.
Despite unanimous information to the contrary from residents, we are certain that two species are becoming zoological rarities in those areas; we are referring to the wolves or guarás (Canis Chrysocyon) jubatus, DESM). and sussuaparas (Cariacus (Blastocerus) paludosas DESM.); this species is even more common in certain regions of @(Mato Grosso). Despite all the interest we have in acquiring specimens of those mammals, due to the importance of the parasitological material they host, the repeated raids were useless.
in the most suitable places, and on one occasion, one of our assistants was sent for 8 days, accompanied by an experienced hunter, but all in vain.
Even in the plains, completely uninhabited, we were unable to find anything other than the tracks and footprints of some specimens of these species, which must be considered rare for science in the places we visited. In the plains of Bahia and Goiás they are still very abundant. The Cariacus (Blastocerus) campestris CUV. and the Cariacus (Blastocerus) rufus ILLIG. are present everywhere.
The felines of @(Brazil) are not perfectly determined, there is some confusion about the species; in @(Piauí), @(Bahia) and especially @(Goiás) the naturalist will find excellent field for research. The predominant species is Felis (Leopardus) onnsa L., the jaguar; Felis (Uncia) concolor L., the common çuçuarana, is much more common. The spelling we adopted of onssa for the scientific designation is to comply with the pronunciation of the word as it is in fact made; a large number of lovers wrote “Felis onca”, without a cedilla; this is due to the requirements of the rules of zoological nomenclature, which do not allow diacritical marks that do not exist in the Latin language; so, the best way to combine fantasy with the rules is to spell the word, in the way we did, already used by several zoologists).
Among cats, the common one is Felis (Oncoides) wiedi. SCHINZ (wild cat) is a species slightly larger than the domestic cat, reddish in color and not rare due to the skins found in homes;


[109]
We saw a live specimen of this in Tigre (Pernambuco), perhaps it is Felis (Catuputna) cyra FISCHER.
In 1910 &(H. von IHERING) published in “Archiv fuer Naturgeschichte” year 76, Bd.
I Heft 2, pp. 112-179, an important work entitled “Systematik, Verbreitung und Geschichte der suedamerikanischen Raubtiere”, where several questions are discussed and as in mammals, as in other chapters of Brazilian zoology, several points are still decided by personal authority, it is indisputable that the opinions of the illustrious director of the &(Museu Paulista) by his authority have great value in resolving controversial points; however, in this group as in so many others, a review is necessary.
The regions covered, except Goiás, have a wealth of fossil material; there are frequent references to skeletons of large animals, generally found by residents when, during droughts, they dig wells in small, dried-up lakes, and they cite examples of the use of certain bones, probably shoulder blades, used for beating clothes.
In @(Juazeiro), near @(Perí-Perí), we heard reference to the fact for the first time; in the municipality of @(São Raimundo Nonato) we had the opportunity to find bone fragments of large mammals taken from the lake of one of the farms, belonging to the &(ANTUNES DE MACEDO brothers). These owners also informed us that from the S. Victor farm, 30 kilometers from the village of @(São Raimundo), between 1880-1881 large quantities of fossilized material were taken, which was taken by &(Mr. CHRISTOVAM BARRETO) to @(Rio de Janeiro). At the @(Gameleira farm), property of &(MARIANO RIBEIRO SOARES) and 50 kilometers from the aforementioned village, fossils have been found in great abundance. Near the town of @(Caracol) 7 kilometers away, in @(Lagoa do Sal) and in @(Fazenda Campo Alegre), 10 kilometers away, identical findings have been made. 36 kilometers ahead of @(Caracol), in the “Emparte” lagoon belonging to @(Fazenda Serra do Meio) and 8 kilometers from @(Jatobá), municipality of @(Remanso) @(Bahia) residents have discovered fossils several times.
The fragments we saw on the farm @(Tanque) in the municipality of @(São Raimundo Nonato) certainly belonged to representatives of the Dasypodidae. All our research into the presence of fossil mollusks was negative, and the same result was obtained with the investigations carried out to verify the presence of Psaronius brasiliensis BRONGNIART. We only learned from information that fossilized palm trees have been found in @(Jerumenha) @(Piauí), which may refer to the tree fern in question, whose structure may cause confusion for the locals. Since the species was found by &(GARDNER) in Amarante, it is not unlikely that the references concerning the palm trees of @(Jerumenha) relate to the Psaronius in question.
In vol. XXXVII No. 221 4 th Ser. pp. 425-444 May 19(4 of “The American Journal of Science, Art. XXXVI, entitled” “The Pertnian Geology of Northern Brazil” the illustrious &(Dr. M. ARROJADO LISBOA) publishes an important work where the question of Psaronius and the localities where it has been found to date in @(Brazil) are noted. In the area of our crossing the author and his assistant &(BAUMANN), were able to verify the presence of Psaronius in the vicinity of the village of the Crahós Indians, between the @(rivers Manoel Alves Grande) and @(Manoel Alves Pequeno) and 70 kilometers from @(Porto Nacional) in @(farm Buritizal), localities in Goiás.
Dermatophilus penetrans (L), commonly known as “chicken foot” is rare in the dry area and in the surroundings of @(São Raimundo), it does not exist according to the information.
The rarity of this parasite is due to the small number of pigs and the fact that the inhabitants of the caatinga area, for the most part, wear sandals in order to protect themselves from the thorns, which are extremely abundant in the vegetation of the area.


[110]


In @(Caracol), where the habit of walking with shoes does not exist, because the vegetation there has a completely different appearance; the “bicho de pé” is already very common and from then on it is always found, as was to be expected. During the dry months, the number of D. penetrans increases; in places, however, like Perí-Perí, where pig farming is more intense, the “bicho de pé” exists “dry and green”, that is, all year round. From this region onwards the well-known name “bicho de pé” disappears to be replaced by the name “bicho de porco”.
In a place called @(São José), in the municipality of @(Porto Nacional), we found a hunted tapir with its feet riddled with Dermatophilus GUER. MEN., which we still do not know to be penetrans, or a separate species.
However, if so, it is a host that has not been fully resolved as yet for the parasite in question. As the question of whether it was Brazil that gave rise to the African D. penetrans, or whether, on the contrary, this plague was introduced here by the slave trade, has not been fully resolved, this finding sheds some light, as Tapirus americanus may be the primitive host of the ectoparasite, which, after its discovery, found an excellent environment for developing and propagating in pigs.
From information we learned that peccaries were also attacked.
As for the other siphonaptera, in addition to the common species such as Pulex irritans L. Ctenocephalus felis. (BOUCHÉ), Ctenocephalus capis CURTIS, which are relatively infrequent, there is the discovery of the new species Culex conepati ALM. CUNHA, parasitizing Conepatus suffocans AZARA (cangambá), and of a new variety: Pulex irritans var. bahiensis ALM. CUNHA, found in regions close to @(São Francisco). Cf. “Contribution to the study of siphonaptera of @(Brazil)” by &(Dr. R. DE ALMEIDA CUNHA), pp. 146-149, @(Rio de Janeiro) 1914.
Among the ectoparasites that attack horses, the most common is Sarcoptes scabiei - var. equi GERLACH. Scabies is commonly known in those parts by the name of “lice”, with the name mange being reserved for a completely different disease that we have referred to elsewhere. Human mange is known in some places by the name of “pira”. Scabies is extremely serious, as we have had occasion to verify, and reports say that horses can even die.
Chrysomya macellaria (FAB.) is almost exclusively responsible for myiasis in humans and animals throughout the area we visited. From our observations, we found that human cases are much rarer there than in southern Brazil.
Cattle are attacked much more than horses or goats; in some places the mortality rate of young calves, known in much of the route as monjolos, can reach 15% due to this scourge. We saw a tapir a few hours after it was killed, with its face and head completely covered in eggs of the “C. macellaria”; it is a common observation that meat left in the sun, in order to prepare “carne de vento” or “carne do #sertão” or simple “matalotagem” (which corresponds to the charque of the southerners), is covered in eggs of the dipteran in question or even larvae; however, this in no way prevents the meat from being used for food, and the consumer is limited to removing the eggs and larvae with the help of a knife, which are also known there by the name “tapuru”.
Chrysomya macellaria is found year-round, decreasing only in the colder months.
In some places, Stomoxys calcitrans GEOF., a hematophagous dipteran very similar to the housefly and suspected by several authors of being the transmitter, among other trypanosomiases, of “mal de Cadeiras”, an epizootic disease abundant throughout the route, is known as “murinhanha”. The time of year in which we crossed the dry zone was already unfavorable, since the murinhanha is only very common in the “green zone”. In all municipalities


[111]
In @(Juazeiro), @(Petrolina), and a large part of @(São Raimundo Nonato), goat farming is intense, with the farmer's house, usually opposite, having a “pigsty”, the name given to the corral for goats and goats, which constitute excellent breeding grounds for Stomoxys; in addition to these, there are also corrals for cattle, etc., etc.
The name murinhanha must have originally designated, in those regions, some representative of the Tabanidae family, since Stomoxys calcitrans invaded @(Brazil) when horses were introduced. Although the presence of native species of Stomoxys in @(South America) has been reported more than once, this does not seem to be true; it is probably a question of melanotic varieties or other similar alterations that could give rise to the mistake.
&(Dr. A. MACHADO), in @(S. Lourenço) and @(Cuiabá) @(Mato Grosso), registered the word beruhanha to designate a representative of the Chrysopinae and which, according to the description, must refer to Chrysops laetus F.. The Tupi expression, according to &(TEOD. SAMPAIO), means exactly “stinging fly” and the only ones existing in @(Brazil) were the Tabanidae.
In fact, based on the information obtained in those places, the word murianha or muruanha, as it is also pronounced, will be used to designate, depending on the location, either flies of the Stomoxys genus or dipterans of the Chrysops genus.
The domesticated fly, a cosmopolitan insect accused of spreading various diseases, finds incomparable conditions for proliferation in the caatingas, since the aforementioned pigpens serve as excellent breeding grounds. Inside houses, the number of these flies is sometimes truly incredible, and in one house in a place called @(Barrinha), in the municipality of @(São Raimundo Nonato), the abundance reached unbelievable proportions, never before observed by us; cream cheese, which is manufactured without the slightest protection, is the flies' main source of food.
Among the ectoparasites found is Mydaea pici MACQ., a moss with a wide geographic distribution, found from the Antilles to Argentina. Nothing was known about its existence in Central Brazil, and there we came across hosts still unknown to science, such as Furnarius rufus (GM.) (João de Barro), Molothrus bonariensis (GM.), (muckwheat); several representatives of the Turdidae family, and Paroaria larvata BODD. (cardinal); species of the Amazon and Pionus genera (parrots and parakeets). In Pernambuco and Piauí, the common name given to this ectoparasite is “berro”; this designation is genuinely vernacular, since in Portugal this name is used to designate the cutaneous larva of Hypoderma LATR. and, as to this day, the expression berne continues to be of unknown origin, a fact that has aroused the interest of people who have dealt with the subject, it is not unreasonable to vulgarize the word in current use in @(Central Brazil) and from where perhaps, as a corruption, the word berne was derived.
It had been a few years since we first heard references to blistering insects called potós, inhabiting the #backlands of @(northeast Brazil); the imperfect descriptions provided by informants prevented us from recognizing to which order the incriminated insects belonged.
In Juazeiro, we had the opportunity to examine an individual who was a victim of intense secretion from the potó, which, when passing over the back of his neck, expelled a certain amount of vesicant liquid, resulting in great irritation of the skin and which, due to the itching, created the opportunity for secondary infection caused by the patient's unkempt nails.
This time, we were unable to identify the accused insect, since the description given by the individual in question did not allow us to identify it; however, we learned that these insects are common mainly in cornfields, where accidents are quite common during harvest. In @(Pernambuco) in a place called @(Terra Nova), we were able to identify one of the incriminated insects; it was a coleoptera of the genus Epicauta REDT., whose representatives are already
[112]
known to science, for being vesicants; the common name is “potó-pimenta”; in fact &(MARTINS COSTA) had published many years ago, in “Progresso Médico” some notes about a cantharide found in @(Rio de Janeiro).
From the locals we learned about the existence of other types of potós, much more feared than the Epicauta. Days later, we were able to resolve the issue and recognize that the infamous potós are staphylinids of the genus Paederus FABR.
Our collection consists of several species and we will publish something about it later, completing the information provided in the work of &(PIRAJÁ DA SILVA) (cf. Le Poederus columbinus est vesicant. In. Archives de Parasitologie, T. XV Nº 3 pág. 331, Pl. 1, fig. 5 - Paris 1912), which attributes the accidents exclusively to Poederus columbinus CAST., when, in fact, several species are responsible.
We have the impression that the consequences of the vesification caused by the beetles in question are generally exaggerated, with the most serious accidents occurring due to secondary infections; in addition to this name, the potós are also known as “wild fire”, Paederus, and “tucura”, Epicauta. In fact, the latter common name is quite inappropriate because, in the Tupi language, from where it comes, tucurá means grasshopper; an orthopteran that cannot be confused with any beetle.
In Goiás, the number of potós is decreasing and they are not as well known as in the semi-arid zone. In the municipalities of @(Juazeiro) @(Bahia) and @(Porto Nacional) @(Goiás), we had the opportunity to collect some specimens of Dinoponera grandis (GUER.). In those regions, the famous ant does not seem to cause the well-known nuisances, nor were we able to record any common name. In the @(Amazônia), the “tocandeira” was noted by &(OSWALDO CRUZ) as an insect “whose bite is extremely painful”; See Madeira-Mamoré Railway Company – General Considerations on the Sanitary Conditions of the @(Madeira River) – page 17 – Rio 1910.
Later, &(ROQUETTE PINTO) interestingly published a report on the tocandira, where on page 25 he states that perhaps Dinoponera grandis var. lucida may constitute a separate species, since only in @(Central Brazil) and in @(Amazonia) are cases of poisoning cited. See &(ROQUETTE PINTO) Dinoponera grandis @(Rio de Janeiro) – 1915. The ants we found in the part of @(Central Brazil), consisting of the #backlands of @(Bahia) - @(Goiás), although they were identified with the species in question, are not even known by the inhabitants, except for their size, and they have not heard any reference to their harmful effects.
A very common beetle along the entire route is Dermestes cadaverinus L., and other related species, whose larvae known there by the name of “polia”, a probable corruption of polilha, cause great damage to hides and skins.
Among the ectoparasites of birds, there are representatives of the Hipoboscidae family, which transmit hematozoa belonging to the genus Haemoproteus KRUSE. The collection we made was numerous not only in species but also in specimens; the complete study will take more time and will only be published later; however, we can already say that new species were acquired and the number of hosts was increased, the list of which is given below:
Theristicus caudatus (BODD) (Curicaca)
Belonopterus cayennensis (GM.) (Teo-teo)
Nomonyx dominicus (L.) (Paturí)
Tigrisoma brasiliense (L.) (ox-headed soco)
Leucopternis sp. ?
Heterospizias meridionalis (LATH.) (Black-necked Hawk)
Piaya cayana (L.) (cat's soul)
Plegadis guarauna (L.) (broad-billed soco)
Herodias egretta (GM.) (heron)
Ajaja ajaja (L.) spoonbill)
Gypagus papa (L.) (king vulture)
Catharista atratus brasiliensis (BONAP.)
(vulture)
[113]
Cathartes aura (L.) (red-headed vulture, camiranga)
Columba rufina TEMM. (true dove)
In general, the hypobocids of Brazilian birds are of the genus Olfersia I WIED and Pseudolfersia COQ. Rarely are many specimens found on the same bird; however, we had the opportunity to catch 16 specimens on a Tigrisoma SWAINS, still young, dead on the @(Ilha do Meio) of the @(Lagoa de Parnaguá) and 18 specimens on a Gypagus papa.
The caraúna is commonly very parasitized by these dipterans; hawks are almost constant carriers of another species. The dolumbids frequently parasitized in the south are not so in the northeast of Brazil, at least during the dry months. In the municipality of @(Petrolina), in the month of April, we once traveled about 20 kilometers of caatinga where two species of Phasmidae were remarkably abundant, choosing to roost on umburanas and mandacarus. In the caatinga of Bahia, Pernambuco and some areas of Piauí, however, in less abundance, we regularly encountered an extremely insectivorous dipteran, whose identification we have not yet had the opportunity to make; the fact is interesting because it is a species belonging to a family other than Asilidae, whose representatives are insectivores. The dipteran in question is found mainly on the trunk and branches of the umbu tree. In the Bahian “generals” and in certain parts of the Goian territory, we were able to discover the probable explanation for a much debated scientific fact: we want to refer to the “luminous termite hills” mentioned for the first time in 1879 by &(HERBET SMITH) and affirmed and contested by other authors.
In the place called @(Lage), municipality of @(São Raimundo Nonato), we verified the numerous presence of “fire caterpillars”, that is, several larvae of various beetles and among these the representatives of the group of Phengodes HOFFM. whose larvae and females are luminous. Further on we found the beetles in question in the landing called “Pedra de Fogo”, where the Phengodes larvae and apterous females and also luminous larvae of Lampyridae and Elateridae gathered in surprising numbers; there the termite mounds were very frequent and on them we had the opportunity to collect numerous specimens of these luminous insects.
In the State of @(Goiás) we had to cross a large area rich in termite nests and, although we personally had no opportunity to observe the reproduction of the phenomenon, we heard from several people that the phosphorescence of termite nests is observed at certain times of the year and for some, the explanation resided in the presence of a large number of specimens of “fire caterpillars”, a name that includes all the larvae and laviform adults of luminous beetles.
At the site called @(Jatobá) (Municipality of @(Remanso) - @(Bahia) we were shown a certain portion of sand which appeared luminous when moistened. The resident kept the find as a precious treasure and it was with some difficulty that we obtained a certain portion. Back at the &(Institute), we tried to do research with the material we had brought but we were unable to verify anything. In all probability, the luminosity was due to phosphorescent bacteria, existing in the soil. Today the number of these bacteria is already quite high, unfortunately however, all research has only been carried out with material coming almost exclusively from the sea, such as fish, crustaceans, etc.
&(HENNEGUY) in “Les insectes” p. 93 @(Paris), 1904, refers to the large number of species considered as luminous, deciding the accidental presence of phosphorescent bacteria that have developed on the surface or inside the organism. However, we have not found a single bacteriological verification in this regard, which would elucidate the question completely. In Vol. 9 of the Centralbl. f. Bakt. Orig. p. 561 - Jena 1891, there is a work signed by &(LUDWIG F.) and entitled Ueber die Phosphorescenz von Gryllotalpa vulgaris and where this author testifies to having personally verified


[114]
a fact already noted by other people but, on the other hand, also contested. In 1726, &(SYBILLA MERIAN) denounced the luminosity of our jequitiranaboias and that for this reason they were baptized by the generic designation of Fulgora L.; nobody, after that, had the opportunity to verify the fact; who knows if the explanation does not reside in a transitory phosphorescence due to the presence of luminous bacteria?. In issue 543, Vol. XXXVI page 323 of “Knowledge” published in @(London), in the month of September 1913, an article by &(Count L. DE SIBOUR) was published, reporting on a work published in a French ornithological magazine by &(L. TERNIER) about the existence of luminous birds. &(DE SIBOUR) adds new testimonies of illustrious Englishmen who have verified the fact; Everyone agrees in believing that the explanation for the phenomenon lies in the presence of phosphorescent microorganisms.
It therefore seems that the fact is much more widespread than is generally thought; perhaps the luminosity of the termite mounds that we were told in @(Goiás) is positive, finds its explanation in the circumstance of the numerous presence of luminous insects in the vicinity of the termites or in the very soil of their nests, which are carriers of phosphorescent bacteria; in favor of this hypothesis speaks the finding due to the very probable presence of luminous bacteria.
Hymenoptera are some of the most visible insects in the region, but due to the abundance of some of them and the role that Meliponids play in the diet of the people. The small collection we made was determined by Mr. A. DUCKE. In the surroundings of Juazeiro, specimens of Bombus LATR. were very common in the mornings in April, visiting the yellow flowers of a Cassia, and in the main streets of the city, representatives of the genus Monedula LATR. are very frequently observed, and they are known there by the incomprehensible name of “vulture lice”. Where, however, the abundance of these Hymenoptera reached truly astonishing proportions was on “Ilha do Meio” in Lagoa de Parnaguá; in fact, during the hours we spent there, we did not verify the presence of a single specimen of Tabanidae, which is explained by the hunting that these Diptera suffer due to the presence of Monedula. The species found in such abundance is Monedula signata (L.).
The common people use the term “leopard” to designate any representative of the genus Mutilla L.; the name is probably given due to the pain caused by the sting; the hairs that cover the entire body are very caustic, as we had the opportunity to verify personally.
The representatives of the genus Pepsis FABR. are well known by the local people as “dog horses” and it is a very popular belief that they always fly accompanied by a small fly on each side of their legs, which hide under their wings as soon as the insect lands; despite our efforts to observe this fact, we have never been able to verify it.
A very common wasp throughout the area and which, due to its nocturnal habits, can sometimes be a nuisance to travelers. This is the Apoica pallida (OLIV.); however, there is another wasp whose tasty honey is highly sought after, namely the Nectarina lecheguana (LATR). It is known throughout the area as “enxú”.
In addition to this, we managed to collect 13 indigenous honey-producing species; nowhere are there hives of Apis mellifica L., a species that Linnaeus mentioned in “Omnis orbis terrarum culta” in 1758. Nor do the natives cultivate any of the meliponids that feed on them, despite the ease of maintaining the hives of our indigenous bees. When the “honey-eater” goes out to “honey”, as the local saying goes, he extracts the honey by cutting down the tree; by this process one can imagine the degree of inability of the #backwoodsman. Do not think that honey is part of the diet as something superfluous: on the contrary, in the “generals” and in a large area of @(Goiás) honey, with a little flour and some coconuts, constitutes the ordinary meal, outside of this it is the exception.


[115]
Once, astonished by the complete absence of any slums near the houses, we asked a septuagenarian countryman who was guiding us between @(Salgadinha) and @(Santa Anna), if the natural slums were not more abundant in his youth, since the process of cutting down the wood, each time there was a need to collect honey, in our opinion caused several losses. “Whoever wants to “honey” now, has to “work”. He answered us; “man cuts down and does not plant, so nothing resists” and after a moment of reflection, he concluded with a fatalistic sentence that well reflects the strange psychology of the people of those places: “in this world, what is it that never ends? Only the grace of God”.
In addition to the species mentioned, we collected the following:
Pepsis decorata PERTY
Monedula signata (L.)
Scolia dorsata (FABR.)
Apoica pallida (OLIV.)
Calletes rufipes SMITH
Centris draft MOCS.
Trigona pallida (LATR.)
Trigona jaty (SMITH)
Trigona postica (LATR.)
Trigona ruficrus (SMITH)
Trigona varies (LEP.)
Lemon Trigona (SMITH)
Trigona silvestriana VACHAL
Trigona clavipes FAB, (let's go)
Trigona pallida cupira SM. (“frog mouth”)
Melipona marginata LEP.
Melipona interrupts LATR.
Polybia occidentalis (OLIV.)
Rhatymus bicolor LEP.
In some places, we were attacked by swarms of a tiny bee that caused a lot of discomfort due to its predilection for eyes. It is probably the Trigona duckei FRIESE. The representatives of the order Odonata are known according to the locality by the names of “calunga” and “cambito”; the harmless fulgorids in the south known as “jequitiranaboia” are called “cobra de asa” and “cobra do ar” in those regions and are feared as bringers of death. Under the name “cabeçote”, in certain places, they designate a certain species of termite that is very abundant where it exists, causing great devastation and that has the particularity of making a perfectly perceptible noise when attacking the object.
Atta sexdens F., the leafcutter ant of the southerners, but in the north known as “cassava ant”, “leaf cutter” and “carrier” is abundant everywhere, causing the well-known depredations.
Mollusks are more common than one might suppose at first glance. In marshes, lagoons, ipueiras, etc., it is very common to see a red mass formed by the clusters of eggs of representatives of the genus Paludina LAM., known by the local people as “aruá”, wrapped around the stems of a species of Typha. &(BAKER, F.) published in Vol. LXV - Part III of the Proc. of the Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia, pp. 618-672 Plts. XXI-XXVII 1914 under the title “The Land and Fresh-Water Mollusks of the Stanford Expedition to Brazil”, a great work on the subject, providing copious information on the mollusks of the @(northeast) zone and where a large number of new species are described.
Before concluding the chapter concerning fauna, we will say a few words about the etymology of two names that have been the subject of study by several scholars.
&(MARCGRAVI) says in Histor. avium Lib. V. pp 206-207 the following:
“Ararauna Brasiliensisbus. Figura alteri similis, sed alterius coloris. Rostrum nigrum, oculi caesii, pupilla nigra. Cutis circa oculos alba nigris pennulis variegatur quasi acupicta esset. Crura et pedes fusci coloris, Caput anterius supra rostrum mitellam habet viridibus pennis; sub rostro inferiori ambiunt guttur pennae nigrae: colli autem latera, reliquum guttur, totum nectus et infimum ventrem tegunt pennae flavi coloris: Extremum caput, collum posterius versus, totum dorsum et alas
[116]
exterius coerulei. Extremitatibus alarum plumae flavae sunt admixtae: cauda constat longis pennis caeruleis, quibus aliquot flavae inmiscentur. In genere autem caerulae pennae interius sunt nigrae et quodammodo etiam nigredinem ad later de se spargunt”.
&(RODOLPHO GARCIA) in his work: Names of Birds in the Tupi language - Contribution to Portuguese lexicography @(Rio de Janeiro) 1913, determines the araraúna, described by &(MARCGRAV) as being Anodorhynchus hyacinthinus (LATH.); by description that we transcribe, it is clear that the German naturalist referred to the species today commonly known in the areas of Bahia, Pernambuco and Piauí that we crossed, by the name of “canindé macaw” or simply and more commonly “canindé” and currently baptized in science by the name of Ara ararauna (L.) and thus described on page 153 of Vol. XX of the catalogue of birds of the &(British Museum):
Adult, Upper parts and under tail-coverts blue, in some lights greenish; forehead and vertex olive-green; naked cheeks, lores and upper parts of the cheeks with a few lines of dark green feathers; edge of the cheeks and chin black, the lower feathers of the chin greenish; ear-coverts, sides of the neck, breast, abdomen, and under wing-coverts yellow orange; quills and tail-feathers blue above, golden olive yellow below; naked skin of the cheeks, flowers, and cere dusky flesh-color; iris greenisch grev or pale yellow; bill black; feet blackish. Total length about 31 inches, wing 14. 3, tail about 12, bill 1.6 - 1.3, tarsus 1.1.
Female Like the male, Hab. Tropical America from @(Panama) to @(Bolivia) and @(Guyana), and the entire valley of the @(Amazons).
AZARA described in @(Paraguay) under the name Ara caninde, a macaw very similar to Ara ararauna “Very much like A. ararauna, but the forehead with no greenish tinge” etc., as can be read in the description made by &(T. SALVADOR) on page 154 of the Cat. of the Psittaci, or Parrots in the Col. of the Brit. Museum 1891, in no way resembling or suggesting the “very dark macaw”, as defined by &(R. GARCIA) on page 17.
We know nothing about the Tupi language and, just to draw the attention of those in charge, we would like to point out that the expression canindé given to the bird should perhaps not express anything that reminds us of black. There is no doubt that it is strange to have &(MARCGRAV) mentioned that the Indians called it araraúna, which means black macaw cf. &(R. GARCIA). op. cit. page 15.
The hyacinth macaw is unknown in the states of Bahia, Pernambuco and Piauí, and is found only in Goiás in the area we visited. If it were an existing species in those states, there would be no doubt that it would be called araraúna, as it already is in several places. The detailed description that MARCGRAV makes of his “ararauna” eliminates the hypothesis that it was a mistake due to some typographical error that confused the description of Anodorhynchus hyacinthinus (LATH.) with Arararauna (L.), for the simple reason that the German naturalist did not refer to that species, and this is due to the circumstance that it is not a representative of the Pernambucan ornis. MARCGRAV only deals with two species of macaws; as is known, the observations of the author in question only refer to the fauna of Pernambuco, with specialization, and to that of Bahia.
The macaws, described by &(MARCGRAV) are the already mentioned canindé and the araracanga (Ara cloroptera GRAV), red macaw; the other species of this color, Ara macao (L.) does not occur in those regions.
&(THEODORO SAMPAIO) - in the two editions of “O Tupi na Geografia Nacional” @(São Paulo) - 1901 and 1914, the word canindé is understood as anegrado tisnado, escuro, etc. Our intention is to bring up the issue so that the competent authorities can resolve it, since it seems very strange to us that the indigenous people of @(Brazil) and @(Paraguay) would call a large bird anegrado or escuro that does not present the slightest characteristic to be so named. In the “Vocabulário das Palavras Guarani” etc. by &(MONTOYA) expanded and annotated by &(BAPTISTA CAETANO) and which constitutes volume VII - of the Annals of the National Library of @(Rio de Janeiro)


[117]
we read on page 67, the following regarding the question: “canindé”, name of a species of bird or macaw; perhaps contr. of macaw - canindé, very red-haired macaw, see macaw”. Looking for this word, we come across on page 48 “Araraca” s. red-haired macaw? name of a large macaw or psittaco”. The work of &(BAPTISTA CAETANO) constitutes the source, where everyone will learn; in it the meaning of the word canindé is only given interrogatively; let the competent ones resolve the question.
Taking advantage of the opportunity, we will discuss the spelling of the indigenous name for a certain Brazilian mammal.
In the Dictionary of the Fauna of @(Brazil) by &(R. VON IHERING) - @(São Paulo) - 1914, the author, although recording the expression sussuapara for the red deer, recalls that the correct designation is “suassú-apára”. We believe, but can affirm that in the regions of Bahia and @(northern Goiás), the residents only refer to the aforementioned deer by the word sussuapara. Nor do we hear, as &(HENRIQUE SILVA) states on page 80 of “Caça e Caçadas”, the name sussúapára serving only to designate the female. The word as we spell it, designates, in the aforementioned regions, the red deer of either sex.
In fact, in a previous work by &(H. SILVA) and entitled “Hunting in @(Central Brazil) - @(Rio) - 1898 - one reads in the preface written by general &(COUTO DE MAGALHÃES), a list of Tupi names for various animals and where the word “suçuapara” is found to designate the deer in question.


Chagas disease


Due to its importance for indigenous pathology, the study of this trypanosomiasis, whose presence has already been reported in Argentina and later in the Republic of Salvador, Central America, is also very likely to exist in other countries in South America and which, in some areas of the country, is a scourge in proportions not even remotely suspected by the Nation, as we have seen in localities in Goiás. Below we present research carried out some time ago in the laboratory but which was only confirmed with the facts acquired during the scientific excursion now reported.
We would like to refer to Triatoma sordida STAL, a new transmitting agent of Chagas disease, of which we will provide information on its biology and distribution in @(Central Brazil), together with epidemiological data concerning the aforementioned trypanosomiasis in the route taken.
In early 1911, we began research into the biology of T. infestans KLUG of Argentine, Chilean and Brazilian origin and of T. sordida STAL, a frequent guest in homes in several countries in South America.
Our aim was to verify not only data concerning the ecology of those species, but also to try to find elements that demonstrated the possibility of transmission of Trypanosoma Cruzi CHAGAS by the hemiptera in question.
On March 23 and 28, we had specimens of T. sordida and infestans presenting trypanosoma in their feces, since we had been feeding them on infected guinea pigs since the beginning. From that date on, the specimens in these conditions only fed on healthy guinea pigs and cats, and we were unable to infect any of these animals through this process.
The experiments carried out with this concern only ended on January 5, 1912, without any positive fact other than the suspicion that arose when we studied the biology of T. megista BURM, that American trypanosomiasis was transmitted in a practically not completely clarified manner, since, in numerous experiments carried out by us by feeding guinea pigs, cats and dogs with infected specimens of T. megista, in all stages of evolution and coming from various states of @(Brazil) where Chagas disease reigns, we only managed to infect by bite some guinea pigs that were feeding a batch of “barber bugs” coming from @(Minas) and found by the servant in a house that had been uninhabited for a long time, but whose pigsty was sought after


[118]
shelter for pigs that spent the night there and which served as pasture for the specimens in question.
We brought this fact to the attention of Dr. CHAGAS, to whom we delivered the specimens of T. megista, which were certainly infectious by bite. The percentage of direct transmission remained small in our experiments; in fact, the original work of CHAGAS showed that the rarity of infections by bite had not gone unnoticed by its author, since on page 192 of Volume I, part II of the “Memoirs of the Oswaldo Cruz Institute” he refers to the fact as follows: “The other two observations of flagellates in the salivary glands were made in insects collected from infected dwellings. In this case, the largest number of Hemiptera, although presenting flagellates in the hindgut, showed nothing in the salivary glands; a certain number of them, however, in an undetermined centesimal ratio, are infected and are infectious, and parasites with the morphology described are seen in the salivary glands. This observation, in fact, is confirmed in attempts at infection through the bite of conorhinus insects collected in human residences, in which only a small proportion of insects are infectious.”
Now, in March 1912, we had the opportunity to travel through the #backlands of @(Bahia), @(Pernambuco), @(Piauí) and almost all of the inhabited part of @(Goiás) where we came across facts that we considered to be important for the epidemiology of American trypanosomiasis and that led us to begin the interrupted experiments on the role of Triatoma sordida in the transmission of Chagas disease.
From the city of @(Juazeiro), on the left bank of the @(São Francisco), we noticed the predominance of T. sordida over any other species of hematophagous reduvida. In the villages and towns of Pernambuco such as @(Petrolina), @(Morrinhos), @(Cacimbas), @(Melancias), @(Terra Nova), @(Barreiras), @(Tigre), @(Cachoeira do Roberto), @(Floresta), @(Conquista) and @(Outeiro), until we penetrated the territory of Piauí towards @(São Raimundo Nonato), the species in question would be the only one present if it were not for the finding of a specimen of Triatoma maculata ERICH.
In the territory of Piauí, however, we found the first specimens of T. brasiliensis, a species that began to predominate among domestic hemiptera and, taking advantage of the stay of a few days in @(São Raimundo Nonato), a village with a population of approximately 2 thousand inhabitants, we were able to study in greater detail the fauna of rare hematophagous insects that parasitize homes in Central Brazil and their relationship with Chagas disease.
As for cases of trypanosomiasis, the research carried out in the area covered up to this village was completely negative and according to this verification it was found that we did not find a single specimen of Triatoma megista. The information, however, suggested the existence of this Triatoma in the surrounding area and indications of patients with Chagas disease in villages in the municipality of @(Remanso).
A few days after our stay in São Raimundo Nonato, we were able to obtain perfect knowledge of the hemipterological fauna that interested us and we verified that the “wall bugs”, the name given to the few domestic hematophagous insects in those parts, were in that part of Piauí, constituted by the following species cited in order of frequency: Triatoma brasiliensis NEIVA, T. maculata ERICH, T. megista BURM. and T. sordida STAL. Of these two species, during the 17 days of our stay in São Raimundo, we were unable to obtain even a dozen specimens.
A little further on, in a place called @(Lages), T. megista suddenly began to appear with its characteristic abundance and, unusually, without being accompanied by T. sordida. Research carried out on the intestinal contents of numerous specimens of T. megista did not reveal the presence of trypanosomes and, in accordance with this fact, the absence of trimannosomates was found, and the inquiries only revealed the closer presence of Chagas disease, to the south of the region where we were. The inquiries to obtain information,


[119]
They mainly aimed to find out whether or not there was a goiter and the presence of “wall bugs”, in order to guide us on the cause and effect relationship between the goiter and the hematophagous redoubts.
In this location, therefore, we were faced with a great abundance of transmitters without the disease existing, despite information about its proximity. This condition remained the same until the @(village of Parnaguá), where the first triatomes and infected local inhabitants were found, in fact in a tiny proportion in relation to the abundance of transmitters.
A few days before this village, in the town called @(Caracol), we began to notice that Chagas disease was “appearing”, that is, it appeared sporadically in the picturesque saying of those areas and, although the great abundance of barber bugs could allow enormous devastation, this did not happen and the large quantity of hemiptera examined, showed no signs of infestation. As there were no guinea pigs in the locality, we inoculated the intestinal contents of several triatomes in two cavies (Cavia aperea, ERXL.) which showed no signs of infection.
It is obvious that there is a cause in these parts that prevents infections in hemiptera; what it is we cannot say for sure, but we are inclined to believe that the scarcity of water perhaps explains this still obscure fact.
Due to the circumstance that the first infected hemiptera were only found in @(Parnaguá), located on the edge of the largest body of water found after a 300-kilometer journey through an arid zone; the fact that the disease existed further south or north of the area we were traveling through and where humidity conditions were higher; the obvious verification of cases of the disease in greater numbers in @(Formosa), on the left bank of the @(Rio Preto) in the State of @(Bahia), and, above all, the universality of trypanosomiasis throughout the State of @(Goiás), where the abundance of watercourses is truly notable, are verifications that coincide in such a way as to allow the supposition that Trypanosoma CruziI requires mesological conditions to infect hemiptera.
However, as we approached @(Goiás), the cases became more frequent and T. sordida began to appear in homes together with T. megista, although in small quantities.
This area, however, did not allow for a large number of observations, since the villages were recently formed, such as São Marcello, at the confluence of the Sapão River with the Preto River. From there, until reaching the village of Duro, the traveler travels 192 kilometers through a completely uninhabited region.
This village allowed us to better observe the situation, since it is separated by a large and deserted stretch of land from Bahia, and could provide a pathological index of the Goiás region. This is a town that was formerly rich in alluvial gold, which was exhausted by ancient explorers and whose traces still persist. Malaria does not exist or is limited, as far as we can ascertain and from the unanimous information obtained. Despite the trade with the town of Barreiras, where many inhabitants become infected, malaria does not spread; the only anophelines captured during 11 days of research were: Chagasia fajardoi, Cellia albimana and argyrotarsis, these two species, however, in very small numbers and outside the town. The number of “papudos” is, however, enormous and the goiter reaches levels never seen before by us; the frequency of T. sordida is very high; the number of T. megista is very low; These were the only species of hematophagous reduvidae found. Near the village of Duro there was, until recently, a village of Indians who disappeared or interbred with the newly arrived elements, however, the crop was never observed among them, the same did not happen with their descendants who merged with other races.
This fact caught our attention and we tried to observe it from then on, throughout the territory of Goiás, which offers incomparable conditions for observations of this kind.
The notable predominance of T. sordida over T. megista in a largely


[120]
infested with Chagas disease, they reawakened the suspicions we had maintained since 1911.
During the 11 days we spent in @(Duro), we were able to verify once again the relationship that T. sordida has with watercourses. In @(Brazil) at least, all the localities where we have this species are located near rivers or streams and the area we now visited was particularly instructive regarding this relationship with T. sordida.
We found it present in the cities of @(Juazeiro), @(Petrolina) and small towns bathed by the @(São Francisco); As we moved away from it, the species in question became increasingly scarce until it disappeared completely, as we moved deeper into areas where water became scarce.
In São Raimundo Nonato, T. sordida reappears, although in small numbers; near this town flows the Piauí River, whose course is interrupted during the warm months. From there, until the vicinity of Parnaguá, we cross the area that is perhaps the most affected by droughts in the entire country; it is a 240-kilometer journey through an arid region where T. sordida does not exist.
As we approached the area known in @(Piauí) as “Vereda do Curimatá”, water began to appear in greater abundance and even in profusion, as in the places called @(Ipueiras), @(Ibiraba) and the @(vila de Parnaguá).
T. sordida reappears, and from then on, in the areas of Piauí and Bahia that we had to cross to reach the State of @(Goiás) and, in this State, from north to south, up to @(Anhanguera) near @(Minas Gerais), we can always verify in an area between 11º - 19º South Lat. and 6º - 57 - 4º Long. W, representing a route of over 1500 kilometers, the constant presence of this species in all the locations visited.
In the city of @(Porto Nacional) where we stayed for 8 days, &(Dr. FRANCISCO AYRES DA SILVA), drew our attention to the absence of Triatoma megista, despite the presence of a large number of goiter carriers.
In fact, all the research we did to find this species was fruitless. In fact, before we went there, Dr. A. MACHADO, who had stayed there for 15 days, managed to obtain only one specimen, which clearly shows how rare it is. On the other hand, we obtained many specimens of T. sordida, which in Porto Nacional is undoubtedly the main transmitter of Chagas disease; however, we did not find any infected specimens. Recently, Dr. MACHADO told us that in Januária, a mining town on the banks of the São Francisco River, where trypanosomiasis is rife, he was unable to find any specimens of T. megista, which is the opposite of what he observed with T. sordida.
The experiments we have carried out have now clarified points that seemed obscure, and T. sordida is now playing an important role in the transmission of T. cruzi. In Goiás, the state of Brazil, which is certainly the most affected by Chagas disease, the reduvida in question is undoubtedly the main transmitter, since in all localities, except for the most remote ones from Tocantins, such as Descoberto and Amaro Leite, especially the former, where water is extremely scarce, T. megista was either not present or was in a notable minority compared to T. sordida.
In a preliminary note published in the August 1913 issue of “@(Brasil) - Médico”, we reported the results obtained with T. sordida, whose feces, carrying T. Cruzi, placed in contact with the conjunctiva of a guinea pig infected it after 8 days.
This verification has given us an explanation for the doubts raised above, and has increased our propensity to understand the way in which T. Cruzi is transmitted under natural conditions and, from what we have been able to observe to date, it is most commonly transmitted through the skin and mucous membranes. At this point, we are of the opinion that the habit we have so often observed in livestock
[121]
that we carried out on several species of Triatomae, from the elimination of feces during hematophagy, in addition to the already well-known circumstance that although triatomes can bite almost painlessly to those who are sleeping, they do not, however, suppress the itching resulting from the bite and, therefore, the possibility of gaps in the skin and a possible entry point for the trypanosomes present in the feces.
It should also be considered that, as is well known, hematophagous reduvians prefer to suck the face; this preference, however, does not indicate any special tropism for this part; the explanation is simple, it lies in the circumstance that they are not protected by clothing during sleep, the forearm and especially the hand; due to this fact, they are preferred sites for bites and it is obvious that, if fingers contaminated by feces deposited on these parts come into contact with
contact with the mucous membranes of the mouth or nose or, more commonly, reaching the eyes, infection is likely if not certain, since contamination occurs through the conjunctiva, at least in guinea pigs, as quickly as if we were to perform a peritoneal inoculation.
Let us return, however, to the fact of the concomitant presence of goiter and triatomas in homes; for this, it is necessary to draw attention to certain testimonies of other national and foreign observers that will certainly shed some light on goiter in @(Brazil) and, in some way, will help to clarify the debated problem of indigenous pathology. The areas that we traveled through in @(Central Brazil) are either completely unknown to foreign and national naturalists, such as those in @(Pernambuco), or are unknown to very few, as is the case with those in @(Piauí) and @(Goiás). Recently, the southern area of Piauí was traveled by an Austrian commission led by &(STEJNDACHNER) and the North American &(HASEMANN) in the service of the &(Carnegie Institute). The results of the observations of these naturalists do not help our question, for the simple fact that these researchers only considered research: natural history, mainly ichthyology, and the results published so far of these explorations have nothing to do with the subject of the present chapter. We have to go back to 1836, to find the only naturalist who has to date traveled the same area as us, between the @(village of Parnaguá) in @(Piauí) and @(Natividade) in @(Goiás); we wish to refer to &(GEORGE GARDNER) who from 1836-41 traveled @(Brazil) mainly the provinces of @(northeast). The observations of this author are of great importance to the question, since his research brought great results to science not only in botany where they stood out, but also in geology with the discovery of a species of Psaronius, a discovery that allowed us to determine with certainty the geological formation of a certain region of @(Piauí) and which to this day continues to serve as a standard for identifying the terrain where it is found. We intentionally recall these facts, in order to draw attention to the circumstance that &(GARDNER) was also a doctor and therefore, the observations concerning his profession must be taken into full consideration since, without a doubt, they were made
with the same perfection as the others and which deserved so much from the competent ones.
From @(Parnaguá) to @(Santa Maria), we took different routes; from there on until @(Natividade) the route we took almost 80 years later was exactly the same "The desolate tract of country, upwards of forty leagues in breath, which, we were now about to cross, in order to reach the province of @(Goiás), is called by the people of the country os Gerais”. At that time &(GARDNER) only found one resident, who complained about the depredations caused by the Cherentes Indians; we went to find the last residents, numbering 8, in the place called @("Barra dos Veados") just 16 kilometers from @(Santa Maria); these people, harassed by the drought of 1898, went to live there after expelling the "hawk" Indians, as they informed us, who still lived there that year. According to the information from those residents, who maintained relations


[122]
with the aforementioned Indians for a long time, goiter was unknown among them. The Gavião or Caracatí Indians are considered by :&(EHRENREICH) as belonging to the Caypós. According to information from &(Mr. JOÃO DA MATTA), a resident of the locality, they withdrew to a place unknown to him. Among the information given by this farmer, we remember the circumstance that the aforementioned Indians slept on the ground because they did not use hammocks. This fact constitutes one of the characteristics given by &(EHRENREICH) for the large Gê group. To which also belong the Cherentes previously found by &(GARDNER) in the same areas. See Division C. Distribution of the Tribes of Brazil, according to the current state of our knowledge by &(P. EHRENREICH). Translation by &(CAPISTRANO DE ABREU) in Rev. da Soc, de Geographia do Rio de Janeiro-T. VIII pp. 3-55 1st Bulletin 1892.
In 1913, the Journal of the Brazilian Historical and Geographical Institute T. LXXV - Part 1 - pp. 143-205-Rio de Janeiro, published under the title “The Kraôs of the Rio Preto in the State of Bahia” a monograph by &(T. SAMPAIO) and whose reading brought us the conviction that the Indians who infested the @(Barra dos Veados), right at the headwaters of the @(Rio Preto), must have been the Kraôs. In addition to the region being the same, the customs match the information of &(Snr. JOÃO DA MATTA) and in all probability the village of @(Gameleira), to which the author refers, must have been founded after the expulsion of the Kraôs from the @(Barra dos Veados).


This was the first information we had about the presence or absence of goiter among the Indians; the second was reported to us by the inhabitants of the @(vila do Duro) which we have already mentioned above. &(GARDNER), however, when he was in that village, he visited the nucleus of individuals, still existing there in number of 250, taking up 4 pages about what he observed among them. He says nothing about the presence of goiter not only among these Indians, but also in the pages dedicated to the description of @(Duro) and its inhabitants, a place where he remained for 15 days.
When describing the dwellings of the Indians, &(GARDNER) expresses himself as follows: “The Aldea itself contains about twenty houses, all of which are of thc most miserable description the greatest part of them are entirely made of a framework of poles covered over with palm-leaves, and many of them are so much decayed from the united effects of the time and weather, that they no longer from a barrier against wind or rain”
On page 252 referring to a place called @(Mato-Virgem) the author says:
“The place in which it was prepared, i was the apartment where we were allowed to put up, the persons engaged in it being the mistress of the house, who was a young mulatta, and eight slaves, four men and four women; 1 was astonished to find all of them, except one man and one woman, affected with goitre; the swelling ont he neck of one of the women was much larger than her head. They assured me it was a very general complaint in this part of the province of @(Goiás) particularly in the @(Villas Natividade) and @(Arrayas); in the @(Aldea of Duro), I saw only one woman affected by it, and another in the @(arraial of Almas)”.
Now, currently, the conditions are completely different, as goiter is extremely common in @(Duro), @(Almas) and @(Natividade) and it would not be hasty to say that the efficient agent of goiter found conditions for its development outside of the water and food factors that, in these 80 years, have not varied in those locations.
Upon reaching the @(Capital of Goiás) after such a long journey and, always with attention focused mainly on the observation of goiter, one fact stood out as constant, not only supported by personal and direct observation, but also by the information obtained, all of which agreed in affirming that goiter, almost without exception, requires for its development and propagation a social condition intermediate between the primitive civilization of the indigenous people and the current conditions of the backward cities and towns of the hinterland. If these progress, the disease disappears, the opposite being observed with some Indians who approach the intermediate type of civilization.


[123]
which can become carriers of goiters as we were able to observe in a Caiapó Indian woman who lived in the village since childhood and lived among inhabitants who had goiters; this was the only case we observed among Indians, having been informed by the Dominican friars living in the city of Porto Nacional that, only in these conditions, Indians are carriers of goiters and verifications of this kind are rare even for them, incontestably the best experts on the territory of Goiás and who have traveled it in all directions for more than 20 years. Dr. A. MACHADO, who also traveled a large area of Goiás, told us that he only observed 3 Cherentes with goiters in the village of Piabanha; these Indians had already abandoned their primitive life.
In contrast, the testimonies are abundant and, &(A. DE SAINT HILAIRE), in his work “Voyage aux sources du Rio de S. Francisco et dans la Province de Goiás” on pp. 87-119, takes up an entire chapter dealing with the Caiapó Indians, whom he studied in detail, and, when dealing with the diseases that attacked them, he says on page 113; “Of course, I did not see a disease that was a goitre, a disease that disfigured all pedestrians, their observers, and which, as it were, began in Pa vu, almost universal in Villa Boa”. This information refers to the year 1819 and from this date onwards until our days, there is not a single piece of information to the contrary. &(POHL), &(GARDNER), &(KRAUZE), the Dominican friars, all the inhabitants of Goiás, inform without discrepancy the veracity of the fact and even recently, &(Dr. MANDACARÚ DE ARAÚJO) who by virtue of the position he occupied in the &(Indian Inspection Service), whose superintendence in @(Goiás) belonged to him, and who visited at length all the villages of various Goian tribes, including the Carajás and the Tapirapés of the banks of the @(Araguaia) and tributaries, and the Javaés of Bananal Island, where he remained for about 1 year living with this tribe, had the opportunity to affirm to us that goiter is totally unknown among the aborigines.
Therefore, the statement that can be made that goiter in Brazil or at least in @(Goiás), is a disease that occurred after its discovery, does not seem unjustified to us. The first book by @(PISO) on Brazilian Medicine in Historia naturalis Brasiliae deals entirely with the diseases existing in 1648 in @(Brazil) and, as well as recording that leprosy and scabies were unknown until then, when referring to goiter, he says that it is a disease existing in @(Chile):
“In Chili caeteris malis praedominantur, tanquani endemia, sfruniae quidem in parentum semine latentes, sed oria potissimum ex aqua nivali, quae illis ex altissimis montiiini jugis allabitur” çf. paj. op. cyl. &(ANCHIETA), in a letter written by @(S. Vicente), in May 1560, expressed himself as follows regarding the deformities he observed among the Indians: “I will finally say to these @(Brazis), that none they are affected by some natural deformity; There is rarely among them a blind person, a deaf person, an imperfect person or a lame person, none born out of time” cf. Letters from &(J. de Anchieta). An. of the Bible Nac | TI pp, 304-305, Rio 1876. The State of Goiás, which was the last to be discovered, is however the most affected by goiter, which spread there as a backward civilization replaced a primitive social condition.
It is not worth trying to prove that water or food have nothing to do with goiter in Goiás; for us, goiter presents some kind of relationship between man and home, and whether the home is built in the style of the Indians, as can be seen from the transcription made above by &(GARDNER) or from the one made by &(SAINT-HILAIRE) on page 104 of the op. cit. of the dwellings of the Cayapós or, just the opposite, if they are well-built residences of civilized people, the residents never present goiter in the first case, and rarely in the second example. Now, anyone who wants to find a cause-and-effect relationship between the presence of barbers and goiter will not fail to find good arguments in favor of this hypothesis. In the poorly equipped dwellings of the indigenous people, triatomes cannot proliferate under any circumstances;
[124]
They may penetrate and live among the straw of the thatched houses, but if the laying is done in installments and the eggs do not clump together as is observed in other redoubts, the eggs will inevitably fall to the ground, where they will be easily destroyed, mainly by ants. The same will happen with homes in good condition and where the Hemiptera, due to the circumstance of the plastered walls, will also be unable to proliferate. For the successive development of generations, only the hut, shack, shack, or mud hut or the mud house have the elements for this to happen.
&(Dr. MURILLO DE CAMPOS), in several articles, narrates his experience about what he observed in villages in Goiás and Mato Grosso that he had the opportunity to visit when he worked in the &(RONDON commission) and, once again, confirms the absence of barbers in the huts of the Bororo Indians of @(Colônia de S. Lourenço) and the absence of the goiter in this tribe and in that of the Parecís, Mundurucus and Apiacás; in contrast to this, the author refers to the abundance of barbers and goiter in all the villages in the south of @(Goiás), which we also verified.
The capital of Goiás presents an excellent example of the influence of the houses and the presence of goiter; &(SAINT HILAIRE) who visited it in 1819 refers to it as follows: on page 72. T. 2..* “Pretty many of the inhabitants of this city and its surroundings have a goiter, and this is why this disease has become a great impediment to the suffering of those who are afflicted. Today the conditions have changed completely, the inhabitants of the central part of the city, which is made up of modern houses, do not have goiter, only present in some elderly people: the younger generation and the children look good and during our 12-day stay, we were unable to observe goiter in these inhabitants; the information from the residents and from 2 doctors living there is unanimous in affirming that goiter has disappeared there; However, Dr. JERONYMO RODRIGUES DE MORAES told me that even today, cases of thyroid hypertrophy are occasionally observed, which are not very pronounced and which the people call “thick neck” and “windy nose”, and which are easily overcome by iodine applications.
In the suburbs, however, the complete opposite is observed; goiter is abundant and present in all ages; the houses are almost without exception made of mud. In all the cities and towns of Goiás until reaching C @(Anhanguera) the same fact is repeated.
From our observations, goiter only exists in a semi-civilized condition; it is an evil linked in some way to housing; non-existent among the Indians, spreading in the last 89 years in the extreme north of @(Goiás), according to the quote we made from &(GARDNER) and from what we visually observed: generally absent from areas where there is a shortage of water, but it can be found in towns such as @(Almas), @(Amaro Leite), and @(Descoberto) where that element is naturally scarce.


As civilization penetrates, goiter disappears, at least the observation of what has been happening in @(Brazil), is without exception favorable to this theory; in 1824 goiter existed in @(Rio Grande do Sul) and 20 years later it invaded @(Rio Pardo), Cachoeira and Caçapava according to &(SIGAUD) information.
In 1844 goiter was universal in the cities of @(Jundiaí), @(Jacareí) and @(Mogi-Mirim) in São Paulo and with the penetration of progress, the disease was continually disappearing; goiter was so common in the Province of @(S. Paulo) that &(MARTIUS) when depicting a woman from São Paulo, draws her with goiter and more recently still, we see it disappear with the transformation operated in @(vila Curral del Rey) to make way for the city of @(Belo Horizonte).
To avoid the conclusion that goiter is linked to Chagas disease, it would be necessary to admit the existence of other morbid entities, also transmitted by barber bugs or even an efficient cause existing in the same nosological conditions favorable to the development of those hemipterans; in favor of these facts, which we recall only as a hypothesis, speaks the circumstance of the null or small proportion of infected Triatomas.


[125]
found in locations where goiter is very abundant such as @(Duro), @(Porto Nacional) and @(Descoberto).
The first works written by doctors and published in Brazil about goiter were the following: the first in 1800 under the title “Memória sobre o papo que Ataques nos Homens e animaes no Brasil” (Memoir on the goiter that attacks men and animals in Brazil). The second, although it was printed in 1831 in Paris under the title “a Dissertation sur le goitre” (Dissertation on the goiter), deals with the subject from the Brazilian point of view; it is the doctoral thesis of the notable naturalist &(FREIRE ALLEMÃO).
The work that appeared in 1800 may have been written by &(ARRUDA CAMARA), although we found nothing positive in Sacramento Blake's Brazilian Bibliographic Dictionary. Later, only in 1841, the theses of @(Rio de Janeiro) “Outline about Bocio” by &(J. MARIANNO DOS SANTOS) and “Some considerations on the Climate of @(Minas Gerais) by &(E. BENEDICTO OTTONI) appeared.
We have not yet had the opportunity to find the first work; from some references we know that &(FREIRE ALLEMÃO)'s thesis is affiliated with the water theory; the work of &(MARIANNO DOS SANTOS) refers to &(SAINT HILAIRE)'s impressions regarding goiter in @(Minas) and the surprise he had at the abundance of the same in the vicinity of @(S. Paulo), also reporting &(d'ORBIGNY)'s surprise at the frequency and size of the goiters he observed in @(Jacareí), @(Mogí das Cruzes) and @(S. Paulo). &(MARIANNO DOS SANTOS) completely rejects water or food as producers of goiter, arguing with the examples of @(Colombia), @(Chile), etc.
&(OTTONI)'s work presents nothing new, except for the fact reported on page 27 when he mentions the disappearance of goiter in @(Minas Novas), after this location had experienced a great increase due to the prosperity brought by mining and the rise in cotton prices, which led to the complete disappearance of goiter after 30 years, which is in agreement with general observation.
All other studies published to date by physicians and travelers, with the exception of that of &(CHAGAS), subordinate goiter to the hydric theory. The nervous forms of CHAGAS' disease were found throughout the route, mainly in @(GoiÁS), although at a much lower frequency than goiter; the only typical myxedematous form was found in an 8-year-old child living in @(Água Branca), municipality of @(Corrente), @(Piauí) and examined by us, when going to the doctor's office accompanied by his father, who is a goiter sufferer, and came to us for medication for illnesses that had no relation to trypanosomiasis. In the municipality of @(Parnaguá), goiter is not very abundant, in @(Corrente) it is more frequent and, according to the information, it seems to be very abundant in the municipalities of @(Bom Jesus da Gurguéia) and @(Filomena). Some people told us that adults from the municipality of @(Parnaguá) who went to live in locations in the municipality of @(Filomena) acquired goiter after 6 months of staying there.
Both goiter and the nervous and cardiac modalities recorded by &(CHAGAS) were verified to be present in the localities of the municipalities of @(Remanso), @(Sta. Rita do Rio Preto) and @(Barra do Rio Grande) belonging to the State of @(Bahia); and throughout the Goiás region.
In @(Formosa) @(Bahia) a goiter sufferer told us that it is a relatively recent invasion brought by the people of Goiás. In a remote location from this town, a small farmer who had fled as a result of major conflicts that had taken place there, after living in a town in Goiás for a year, observed that almost all of his children had acquired goiter, although none of the adults had.
In addition to the forms mentioned, cases of cretinism, infantilism and deaf-muteness are very common in @(Goiás), especially in the municipalities of @(Duro), @(Natividade), @(Amaro Leite), @(Pilar) and @(Descoberto). In places like @(Descoberto) where the population is around 400 residents, almost all of them are infected and although not all of them have a “developed goiter”, a large number have the sensitive cretinism.


[126]
cement of the “thyroid” “thick neck” as they commonly call it. Travelers always avoid staying in deserted places, as this practice helps the spread of infested triatomes, which are carried by saddlebags and other riding accessories kept inside the houses where they stay. Although endemic there, there is a noticeable tendency on the part of several Bahian doctors to give less importance to the focus constituted by the city of @(Recife) where they believe they receive the cases producing the epidemics. It is absolutely impossible for the inhabitants of any city to be sheltered from endemics and epidemics, due to a privilege


BIBLIOGRAPHY:


&(CAMPOS, MURILLO DE)
	1913
	Notes from the Interior of Brazil-From Rio de Janeiro to Cuiabá
(via Goias).
Brazil - Doctor, Year XXVIl-No 12 -pp. 111—16 —Rio
of January.
	&(CAMPOS, MURILLO DE)
	1913
	Notes from the Interior of Brazil.
Archives of Brazil. Medicine. Year III, No. 2 pp. 195-227.
and No. 5 pp. 497-507-Rio de Janeiro.
	&(GARDNER, GEORGE)
	1849
	Travel in the Interior of Brazil, mainly, through the
northern provinces, and the gold and diamond
districts during the years 1836-1841. London.
	&(KRAUSE. FRITZ)
	1911
	In de Wildnissen Brasiliens. Leipzig.
	&(MAGALLANES,
J. COUTO DE)
	1902
	Trip to Araguaya.
Definitive edition. S. Paulo.
	&(SAINT-HILAIRE, A.)
	1847 - 48
	Voyage to sources of the Rio de S. Francisco et dans la
Province of Goyaz. Paris, çf. T. II.-This work was published many years after A. had traveled through the State of Goiás
	&(SIGAUD, JFX)
	1844
	Du climat et des maladies du Brésil. Paris.
	

Yellow fever ([1])


It is known that the @(Capital of Bahia) is a permanent focus of yellow fever and that cases originating from there have threatened the @(Capital of the Country) on several occasions. The disease is natural; therefore, the @(city of Bahia) must inevitably be an epidemic focus of yellow fever, as it meets all the epidemiological conditions for this.


As early as 1884, &(FINLAY) in his work “Apuntes sobre la historia primitivo de la fiebre amarilla” divided yellow fever into frustrated and true; however, he did not refer to children, but 2 years later, &(CORNILLAC) clearly alluded to the fact that indigenous people were immunized as children. In 1888, &(GUITERAS) published a notable work, in which the issue is discussed in an admirable way; for &(GUITERAS) children are the depositories of viruses, especially those of white color; he affirms the existence of benign attacks that pass


[127]
unnoticed and that immunized them. The &(French commission) that worked in @(Rio), ignoring the work of &(GUITERAS) reached the same result and even more recently, BOYCE verified the fact among black children in @(Africa) and, by the way, wrote a valuable work where he discusses the issue. @(Bahia) that has Stegomyia calopus MEIGEN and optimal climatic conditions for yellow fever endemicity, will not be able to escape the rule.
It is our conviction that the disease was brought in by the railroad and that all the cities up to Petrolina are in similar conditions, where we found a great abundance of transmitters. In Juazeiro and Petrolina, the disease presents the greatest difficulties.
difficulties in being diagnosed, due to the small number of foreigners and these, as a rule, are immunized by a previous attack of the disease, acquired in @(State Capital) or in other locations in the country, where yellow fever reigned or still exists, since, generally, these foreigners only settle in @(Joazeiro), after a prolonged stay, as a rule, in @(the city of Bahia). Certain facts that occurred in @(Brazil) demonstrate the possibility of what we affirm: the case of &(Caio Prado) when president of @(Ceará) dying of yellow fever, in the absence of any yellow fever epidemic in @(Fortaleza), is quite typical. At that time, learned and laymen accepted without discussion the hypothesis of the transmission of the disease by the letters received by the victim and coming from @(Rio de Janeiro). There was nothing strange, given the time, in having accepted the explanation; With the knowledge acquired later, it was found that such transmission was impossible: yellow fever existed in Fortaleza and its presence went unnoticed and was only revealed because it had attacked a prominent personality and the disease developed in a clinically classic way. A similar fact was reproduced a few years ago with a North American engineer, when he was working in Quixadá on a study of dry crops.
We, who have observed the precarious conditions of medical care in @(Juazeiro) and the profound flaws in the civil registry, especially in the part related to death registration, have suspicions that under the label of diseases, intermittent, seasonal, etc., there are cases of yellow fever in children, which went unnoticed not only because of the difficulty in diagnosing them, but mainly because they were presented in a mild and benign form. We would not be surprised if cases similar to those observed in @(Ceará) were verified there. A doctor who deserves all our credit, told us that in @(Jacobina), recently, among Portuguese workers on a railroad under construction, an epidemic was declared for many people diagnosed with yellow fever. In @(vila de S. Francisco), the aforementioned informant
can personally verify the death by yellow fever of a foreigner living there. The illness involved so much that it left no doubt, however the locality was considered free of the disease. The victim, Professor Chevalier, taught agricultural chemistry at the former School of Agronomy located in São Bento dos Lages. During the year of 1914, in the city of Santo Amaro, several suspected cases of yellow fever were observed. This city is close to São Bento and this shows that not only the interior of the State, but also the Recôncavo, are contaminated. The Monthly Bulletin of Demographic-Sanitary Statistics of the State of Bahia - Year 17, March 3, 1912, states that from September 1910 to February 1912, “if not more”, 17 months passed without a single case of yellow fever being recorded. However, between 15 and 27 February 1912, 8 cases occurred in 5 different outbreaks, located at the ends of the city (S. Pedro), (Victoria), (Mares) and (Penha). It is impossible to dispute the information in the aforementioned publication, but the fact certainly seems strange to us and we are inclined to accept that the disease never ceased to exist; its presence simply went unnoticed, since it is almost inadmissible to believe in phenomena of spontaneous sanitation, in an environment that is optimal for the development of the disease.
We recently learned that, in @(Parnaíba), a town close to @(Juazeiro), for years


[128]
There have been cases of a disease diagnosed by many as yellow fever. Official hygiene has verified positive cases in @(Paripe) and other suburbs in contact with the @(Alagoinhas) - @(Juazeiro) Railway; this is yet another argument in favor of our suspicion that @(Juazeiro) and other locations are infected.
By reading the thesis “Prophylaxis of yellow fever” @(Bahia) 1914 by &(Dr. N. SAMPAIO BITTENCOURT), we learned that from 1902 inclusive, to July 1908, that is, during 78 months, not a single fatal case of yellow fever was observed in @(Bahia). If a death verification service had already been in operation at that time, such optimistic statistics might not have had the opportunity to be published.
&(BOYCE), in 1911, happily defined that the acclimatization of Europeans in @(Africa) did not mean anything other than an immunization by Stegomyia and that a large number of diagnosed cases of remitting or bilious remitting fever on the western coast of @(Africa) were in reality no more than benign cases of yellow fever; and he draws attention to the fact that blacks from those regions present the so-called abortive or ambulatory form of the aforementioned illness; forms that, according to the author, go unnoticed by the natives in the same way that, in analogous conditions, occurs with malaria.
Although we do not have personal experience with facts of the nature mentioned, with regard to yellow fever in childhood, we do have observations about the possibility of malaria going unnoticed, not only in children but also in adults. In Xerém, it was relatively common to find children carrying malignant tertian rings in their peripheral blood, without showing any signs of illness; the disease evolved in such a way as to go completely unnoticed not only by the patients, but also by those around them.
In Volume 3-No. 7 of the "Office International d'Hygiene publique'' pp. 1159-1174 - July 1911 - there is an unsigned article entitled "Note snr 1'origine endémique de la fièvre jaune en Afríque Occidentale” where the issue is discussed and documented with a large amount of information. &(STEPHENS) recalls that since 1848, &(W. PYM) said that yellow fever existed in the interior of @(Africa), attacking native races but presenting modifications in clinical forms.
Another case of a sudden epidemic outbreak was reported to us by &(AUGÉ) and &(PEZET) recently, and it is not impossible that similar events occurred in the State of @(Bahia), along the entire route of the railroad that ends in @(Juazeiro), with the same happening in the city in Pernambuco that borders it and where the stegomias are very numerous. When, in 1686, @(Pernambuco) was first attacked by the "bixa", the name given to yellow fever at that time, what was observed was nothing more than a violent epidemic outbreak, spreading throughout the coastal area where foreigners gathered. The transcription that we make below, of a historical document little known to doctors, will demonstrate that, in light of modern knowledge concerning yellow fever epidemiology, the interpretation given should not be any other. &(Dr. DOMINGOS DO LORETO COUTO), after describing the symptoms of the disease, etiology, malignancy, etc., says to page 183 (13):
“It was a matter worthy of reflection that blacks, mulattos, Indians, or mixed races will not be affected by this contagion, as if evil did not have the strength to combat these composite humans, or lacked jurisdiction to use its blows on them. The inhabitants of the backlands will also experience its poison less vigorously, both in extent and in activity, and of those who do become ill, few will die” etc. etc. Vid. An. Bibl. Nacional do Rio de Janeiro “Desagravos Do @(Brasil) e Glórias de @(Pernambuco)'' loc. cit. Vol. XXV —1904.
The cited work was written in @(Recife) in March 1757 and at least in this part it is almost a copy of the History of @(América) Portugueza by &(ROCHA PITTA), published in 1730, adding little to what was written by the historian from Bahia. The 2nd edition of the work by
[129]
&(ROCHA PITTA) appeared in &(Lisbon) in 1880 and from pages 213-218 occupying paragraphs-13-55 of the Seventh Book, the historian only deals with yellow fever. Paragraph 43, for example, refers to a fact still observed today; “and the evil was losing strength, so that either it no longer hurt, or almost all the injured escaped; since for the people who came from the sea or from the backlands, both to @(the city of Bahia) and to @(Olinda), it lasted for many years taking a large part of them, mainly the most robust ones”.
The two authors, however, were not contemporaries of the evil and so we will transcribe the testimony of the great &(VIEIRA) who witnessed the scourge and was even attacked by it: "I find myself with two VM to which I will respond briefly, because these Ships break up so impulsively, as if fleeing death. Such is the plague we are in, which, while sparing few, is more prevalent among seafarers". Letter 101 to &(DIOGO MARCHÃO OTEMUDO), Canas, Vol. II, page 342 @(Lisbon) 1735 —The letter is dated @(Bahia) May 2, 1686. In letter 102 dated July 1 of the same year and written from @(Bahia) to &(Count of Castanheira), &(VIEIRA) insists on talking about the great receptiveness of the seafarers and gives the good news that the evil is abating. This fact is explained by the fact that the months of June to August are the least favorable for the activity of the transmitting insect. In the letters written from Bahia on July 8 and 21, 1692, the author says: “According to other news, I give Your Excellency that the so-called Bicha has ceased in Bahia that year, whose poison, injuring many of the natives, killed many of the guests who arrived, and left them alive and well.”
God has been so merciful to us this year at sea and on land that there were no pirates at sea, and on land the poison of the so-called Bicha was not felt, with which the guests, who are usually the most morbid, become alive and healthy” Ç/. loc. cif. pp. 443 and 459.
It can be seen from the documents cited that the disease spared blacks, mulattos, Indians and mixed race people; that is, almost all the natives at that time, since the white part of the population was almost entirely Portuguese. The disease advanced insidiously to the point of immunizing the indigenous population, since it is now known that there are no races immune to yellow fever. It did not go beyond the Recôncavo, that is, the coastal area because the Stegomyia calopus did not find an adequate means of transport, which did not happen on the coast, where the mosquito brought in the vessels spread through the region along the coast. Thus, in the light of modern knowledge, the epidemic was nothing more than an epidemic outbreak of a disease that was already endemic.
As we have already mentioned elsewhere, the regions away from the hay trail in the states we visited continue to be free of the disease-transmitting agent 230 years after the supposed first epidemic in the country. We know that even today, some Bahian backwoodsmen and adults who visit the capital of Bahia fall ill with yellow fever. This fact has been verified several times and, at first glance, this would prove that the disease does not exist in the backwoods. A fact that has come to our attention and was told to us by a person of complete integrity proves exactly the opposite; here it is: F., a farmer in Brotas de Macaúbas, coming for the first time in his life to visit the capital of Bahia, fell ill with yellow fever.
Now, @(Brotas de Macaúbas) is several days' journey on horseback from the nearest port on the @(S. Francisco River), and should therefore not have the transmitting agent. The @(village of S. Raimundo Nonato) in Piauí, located only 80 kilometers from the city of @(Remanso), a place where Stegomyia is found abundantly, has not been contaminated by the transmitting agent to date, and we can confirm this by checking during our 15-day stay there. At least half of that distance in those parts exempts any town from being contaminated by the disease; our observations suggest this. Any #backwoodsman living there is predisposed to it.


[130]
bad; from the point of view with which we look at the issue, the only thing of decisive importance would be the verification of inhabitants of towns and cities on the banks of the @(E. de Ferro de S. Francisco) having fallen ill with yellow fever when visiting the @(Capital of Bahia).
From @(Petrolina) onwards, up to @(capital of Goias), representatives of the Sfegotnyia genus were only found in the village @(Formosa), on the right bank of the @(Rio Preto), and the infestation of this location was carried out by the steamers of &(Viação Fluvial do S. Francisco); in the other riverside village that we know, that of @(S. Marcello), at the confluence of the @(Rio Preto) with the @(Sapão), we did not have the opportunity to find the culicidae in question, probably due to the short delay we made there.


BIBLIOGRAPHY


&(AUGE, J.) & &(PEZET, O.)
	1912
	Epidcmie de fièvre jaune survenue au Dahomey pendan; les mois de mai et juin 1912 Buli. Sounds Pathol. exotic. Année 5, N« 8 pp. 648-656
	&(BOYCE, RW)
	1911
	British medical journal dec. London.
	&(BOYCE, R.)
	1912
	Note upon yellow fever in the black race and its bearing upon the question of the endemicity of yellow fever in West Africa. Annals ot trop. Med. & Parasitology. Vol. 5 No. 1, pp. 103-110. April @(Liverpool)
	&(CORNILLAC, JJ)
	1886
	Recherches chronologiques sur 1'origine et la propagation de la fièvre jaune dans les Antilles et la Cote occidentale d'Afrique Fort-de-France
	&(GUITERAS, J.)
	1888
	Observations on the natural history of yellow fever epidemics, founded in the study of mortality statistics in the city of Key West, with indications on the need for a continued study of this concern for the Government of the United States. Annual Report of the Supervising Surgeon General of the Marine Hospital Service of the United States for the year 1888. cf. reproduction “Sanidad y Beneficiencia” loc. cit. forward.
	&(GUITERAS, J.)
	1912
	Endemicity of Amarilla Fiebre. Sanidad y Beneficencia, T. VIII, No 6, pp. 617-663, Habana - December.
	&(STEPHENS, W.J.)
	1911
	Discussion on yellow fever on the West Coast of Africa. British medical Journal, No 2654. Nov. London.
	

Hookworm


We verified the presence of this evil in the following cities or towns; @(Juazeiro) @(Bahia), @(S. Raimundo Nonato), @(Caracol), @(Parnaguá) @(Piauí), @(Duro), @(Porto Nacional) and in the city of &(Goiás).
Worm infestation, even in @(Parnaguá), where we found it most abundant, is nowhere near the proportions in which we observed it in @(Xerém) (lowlands of the State of @(Rio); nor does it reach the level seen in certain suburbs of the capital such as @(Jacarépaguá), @(Pavuna) etc.
In the drier areas, the disease decreased, increasing in the localities where the water factor increased; however, we never failed to verify its presence to a greater or lesser degree throughout the route traveled. In the states of @(Goiás and Piauí), where the worm infestation is more abundant,


[131]
Patients affected by it are called “impaled” or “impaled”. As expected, the worm that causes ankylostomiasis in the areas visited is Necator americanus STILES. The specific treatment is completely unknown and, in some places, we can see that geofajia, a symptom that often accompanies mainly children suffering from the disease, is treated with the use of chewing tobacco.


Schistosomiasis
In @(village of Caracol), municipality of @(S. Raimundo Nonato), State of @(Piauí), we had the opportunity to diagnose 2 cases of the disease, whose observations we give below:
MBS— 10 years old-born in @(Pernambuco), @(Salgueiro); from where at the age of 2 ½ she left for @(Vila Nova) @(Bahia) where she stayed until the age of 5, when she retired to @(Boa Esperança), near the @(village of Pilão Arcado) @(Bahia), having remained there for 2 years; after this, she came to @(Caracol) @(Piauí) where we found her and where she had lived for 10 months. In @(Salgueiro) the water used comes from wells; In @(Vila Nova), however, the water comes from a stream called @(“Bananeiras”), which does not “flow”, not even during droughts. In @(Boa Esperança), the water comes from a tank and wells; in this location the girl often enjoyed bathing in the wells; in @(Caracol), however, the same did not happen. The little girl says that on several occasions, in @(Caracol), she indulged in geophagia, a common habit among the children of this village. She has never passed bloody urine; she has been affected by malaria on several occasions.
Current condition: small, rachitic, very pale complexion; slightly coated tongue, discolored conjunctiva, bad breath. She has been suffering from bronchitis for about 3 years; currently she coughs quite frequently. Liver enlarged and painful to palpation; spleen sensitive to palpation.
In @(Vila Nova) she suffered severely from headaches, which still affect her, although less frequently; the headaches start at any time and are always a consequence of some muscular effort expended while playing; sometimes the headaches are accompanied by vomiting; the little patient is very intelligent. Sometimes the stools are accompanied by blood and in Vila Nova, as a result of a castor oil purgative, the stools were interspersed with large quantities of blood. At the time of the examination at 4 pm on 5-5-12 the patient had a temperature of 38°. Blood test negative. Urine without albumin. The stool examination revealed eggs of Schistosomum mansoni and Necator americanus.
The 2nd case was a 3-year-old child, who had never left the municipality of @(S. Raimundo Nonato); the feces contained eggs of Schistosomum mansoni and Necator americanus; the urine was not bloody.
To date, only the researches of &(PiRAJÁ DA SILVA) concerning the cases he observed in Bahia, where the disease seems to be relatively frequent, have been published among us. Intestinal bilharzia, as many call it, is a much more common disease in the north of Brazil than is generally believed; it is not known whether it has ever been reported among Brazilians from the south. We were somewhat surprised to find the parasite in the dry zone and, although the first case, due to the symptoms he presented when he still lived in a place in Bahia, leads us to suppose that it had been infected there, the second case is certainly from Piauí, since the patient had never left the city where he was born.
The absence of bloody urine once again proves right those who think
This bilharzia is different from the so-called vesical bilharzia, caused by Schislosoma haematobium (BILHARZ). All eggs presented a lateral spike characteristic of the species Schistosomum mansoni SAMBON and the parasite was probably introduced not only into Brazil, but also into the Antilles and the South of the United States, with the traffic of black Africans.
Nothing is yet known about the mode of penetration of Schistosomum mansoni, but everything suggests that it occurs through the skin as
[132]
was verified by &(KATSURADA), &(HASHEGAWA), &(FUJINAMI) and &(NAKAMURA) with Schistosomum japonicum KATSURADA. In the locality where the two cases were observed, the parasite in question seems to have recently invaded, since during the 10 days we spent there we had the opportunity to examine the feces of a large number of people, only finding the cases mentioned. If the penetration of the trematode is suspicious, @(Caracol) will soon become a major focus, since the water that supplies the town and its surroundings comes from the only existing lake, where the residents bathe, wash their clothes and the animals drink. It is a shallow collection of water, no more than 1 kilometer wide. More recent research published under the title “Der Zwischenwirt des Schistosomum japonicum KATSURADA nos Mitt. aus der Medizin. Fakult. der Kais. Umv, Kynshu Fukuoka, Japan, Bd. I, pp. 187-197 — Taf. 1-11-1914 by Aíiyairi, /<.Suzuki, M., resolve the question of the evolutionary cycle of the Japanese parasite, allowing in all probability the supposition that the Brazilian trematode has an identical evolution. These researchers were able to verify the development in a freshwater snail belonging to the Hydrobiidae family, but of an undetermined species, of the miracidium of that trematode, having been able to follow the evolution in sporocyst, redia and cercaria, almost completely developed, 7 weeks after the infection of the snail. They also found that infection is extremely easy through the skin of mice, through the cercariae present in the snail. The issue therefore seems to be completely resolved; from miracidium to the cercariae stage, the species of the genus Schistosomum WEINLAND need an intermediate host; however, as soon as the cercariae, free in the water, come into contact with the skin of the definitive host, they quickly cross it and complete the final phase of the evolutionary cycle.
The disease, although not as serious as bladder bilharzia, continues to have completely ignored its treatment, ([2]).
As for the prophylaxis of hookworm disease, given the current hygiene conditions in Central Brazil, it is impossible to do anything practical. Even among people living in better conditions, homes do not have any semblance of a fixed septic tank and feces are carried out or thrown in a certain corner of the yard; since the larvae of Necator americanus penetrate through the skin, it is easy to assume, knowing the habit of children, especially, of walking barefoot, the proportion of infections which does not reach the intensity seen in the south of the country, because the feces are more exposed to temperatures above 37°, which prevents the development of the eggs.
In places such as Vila de @(Parnaguá), @(Duro), where conditions are more favorable, we found infected children belonging to the best families.
The presence of Ascaris L. and Oxyuris RUD was also verified.


Spasmodic dysphagia.
Under this designation we will call the evil that in @(Central Brazil) is called “entalação*' and has long been known among us by the name of “mal de engasgo” “entalo' and “engasgue”.
Apart from the work of &(U. PARANHOS) there is no other work on the disease in @(Brazil); in fact we believe that the fact has gone unnoticed, due to the circumstance that it is only observed in isolation and, therefore, diagnosed as hysterical manifestations, after eliminating the various causes producing dysphagia. It is quite interesting that there is no publication in the Brazilian medical literature about a disease widespread throughout the country. The only references we found are on page 1799 of the 18th edition of the CHERNOVIZ Form - Paris - 1908. c at pp. 298-299
[133]
from the famous novel Innocencia by &(TAUNAY). The information written by the novelist is more interesting than that referred to in the Form and, although the description given is not a paragon of perfection, it is sufficient to identify the evil, to know its common synonym and its spread throughout Brazil. The most precise reference in this regard is that which can be read on pp. 204-205 of the work “The Physical Geography of @(Brazil) Refounded by &(JE Wappceus) (Condensed Edition) given to the public by &(J. Capistrano de Abreu) and &(A. do Valle Cabral) —Rio de Janeiro—1884”. Each chapter of the notable German work was, in addition to being translated, rewritten by a person of all integrity. The one that interests us is chapter XI entitled Health; Epidemics and Reigning Diseases, written by &(Prof. Martins Costa), and which textually says on the pages referred to: “There is also in these regions (The A. refers to &(Curvello), @(Minas Gerais)) an endemic disease, which its inhabitants call the evil of engasgo, which consists, says &(Dr. A. Idelfonso Gomes), in a paralysis of the pharynx;” those who suffer from this disease cannot swallow food; each bolus of food is pushed down by a few sips of water” The same author also reported the existence of this disease in the backlands of @(Goiás) and @(Mato Grosso). Nothing is known to date about the nature of this singular paralysis, nor about its causes and symptoms” The information is from &(Prof. Martins Costa), since the original work by &(Wappãus) published in 1871, says nothing about it. In @(Central Brazil), the phenomenon appears with unusual frequency, which at first glance makes one think of a local disease; after studying the subject, we are convinced that the disease exists everywhere, although in @(Central Brazil) it finds special conditions, very favorable to its development.
The name “tropical dysphagia” given by &(PARANHOS) has the disadvantage of limiting the disease to a given geographic region that may not have it exclusively, which would further increase the incidence of the disease in the tropical region. Incidentally, it is worth remembering that &(KOCH) owes the inappropriate name “tropical malaria” to the malignant tertian, a morbid entity already observed in @(Russia), which is very common in Italy.
It is high time to react against these improper designations, which only serve to increase the misconception in which all tropical zones are considered. Recently, &(BLONDEL) refers to the fact that in 1912 the English government proposed, through diplomatic channels, that the term Malta Fever be abandoned in medical nomenclature and replaced by a more accurate one, since the disease also existed in other countries and the name would harm the reputation of the colony from a health point of view; this fact gave rise to the name melitosis.
Any medical treatise, even an old one, when dealing with diseases of the esophagus, refers to dysphagia and esophagism, in such a way as to arouse in us the suspicion that, in Europe, a similar phenomenon to that observed in (Central Brazil) also occurs, although in a much smaller number.
When we read in the treatise by &(EICHHORST), 1st edition of 1889, the part referring to “Cramp
of the esophagus—Esophagism” we verify the existence of a chapter dedicated to the phenomenon, whose etiology, according to &(EICHHORST), comes from a large number of neuroses of central origin.
&(KFAUS) dedicates a chapter to it, the most complete we know of on the subject to date; there we learn that motor neurosis, as &(KRAUS) calls it, was already known since 1740 by &(F. HOFFMANN) who called it “Dysphagia spasmodica”, a name that we accept because it has priority. By reading the aforementioned work, one can follow the changes experienced by etiology according to the dominant ideas of the time.
&(BERNHEIM), in this regard, published an excellent study and immediately began by citing the synonyms: Dysphagia spasmodica by &(HOFFMANN), Angina convulsiva by &(VAN SWIETEN), Spasme de 1'oesophage by FRANK, Oesophago-spasmus VOGEL , Oesophagisme


[134]
MONDIÈRE, Rétrécissement spasmodique de Pcesopkage BROCA, VIGLA, PETER, Spasmódica stricture BRINTON, POWER MACKENZIE, Slenosis spastica fixa et migrans HAMBURGER, leaves the impression that this is a subject known to professionals in several countries and, from the copious bibliography reproduced in his work and in that of &(KRAUS), it is clear that this is a subject perhaps better known than we initially thought. By comparing it with the modern treatises that we consulted, it is immediately clear that this is a disease that was certainly more common in the past, since the chapters on the subject in modern medical encyclopedias are more a repository of previous observations and where the acquisition of new facts is remarkably scarce.
From reading several works consulted, we are inclined to believe that the observations we made in @(Central Brazil) about the illness there called “entrapping”, perhaps refer to those known in other parts of the world. The progression of the illness, its sudden onset, the ease of hot food being generally better tolerated, the exceptional cases in which some patients can ingest solid food better than liquids, vomiting, when present, being followed by belching, the need for some patients to only be able to eat standing up and moving, the intermittency of the illness with dysphagic crises lasting hours or weeks, the fact that patients in general, outside of crises, only feed themselves by accompanying each bolus of solid food with a sip of water, led us to suspect that “entrapping” is identical to spasmodic dysphagia. For more than 3 months we were able to observe one of our comrades who was entrapping. The crises would come unexpectedly, at any time during the meal,
forcing the comrade to try to drink a few sips of water as quickly as possible. Sometimes he could continue the meal, helping the ingestion with the liquid; other times, however, he was forced to interrupt it, trying to make the patient ecstatic and even vomit, in order to find relief. In these strong crises, the patient would stand up, walk quickly from one side to the other with his chest turned backwards, while at the same time stamping his feet strongly on the ground. Fearing that the ecstatic seizure would repeat itself violently, the patient took the precaution of abstaining, in the days following a strong crisis, from any solid food.
In general, however, the dysphagia lasted for a few days, preventing him from eating in any way. We examined this case as thoroughly as we could, with the elements we had, without positive results. The blood was examined several times and we inoculated some cavies with it, but they showed no signs of illness.
The observations of several clinicians cited by &(PARANHOS), regarding the greater abundance of cases that existed in the past in @(S. Paulo), are in agreement with what we observed in the State of @(Goiás), where the disease is also disappearing, according to our inquiries. In the dry regions of @(Bahia), @(Pernambuco) and @(Piauí) that we have visited, the disease is spreading in a truly remarkable way.
In general, patients do not complain, except for those who present the most serious forms and who spontaneously seek medical help, in the hope of relief; however, for the majority, either because the illness is just beginning or because it has not worsened to the point of tormenting them, it is only known that they are ill through inquiries.
A fact that observers from other countries could not verify is the tolerance that almost all patients show towards brown sugar, an integral part of the diet of the populations of those regions; only rarely, and during crises, do they stop eating this food; the explanation may perhaps lie in the circumstance that the brown sugar is eaten almost dissolved. The cases are much more numerous among men; it is not difficult to observe several members of the same family suffering from the disease; however, we have not obtained any information to judge its heredity or contagiousness. This idea, in fact, is widely held there.


[135]
so much so that some families separate the plates, cutlery and glasses of sick people in order to avoid contagion.
Inguinal hernia is a disease of any age and can even occur in nursing mothers, although rarely; it usually begins between the ages of 20 and 30, however we found a patient in whom the disease began after the age of 40.
&(JEFFERYS) and &(MAXWELL), register an analogous bad in some parts of @(China), where it is known under the name of “Ken sãih ping”, being, it seems, very common from the citations they make of &(MANSON) p. 37 Customs Medicaid Reports, Vol. 2 1876 and from the transcription of &(ELLIOT) and &(COLTMAN).
All the inquiries and information we have gathered are unanimous in informing that once the illness has been acquired, it never leaves the patient. There are cases where patients become debilitated due to lack of nutrition and several people have reported cases of death by starvation, due to the impossibility of ingesting any food.
&(GUISEZ), studies spasmodic dysphagia very well, admitting, in fact, when dealing with
initial cause and pathogenesis of esophageal spasms, the existence of deeply nervous or hysterical spasmodic patients, affected simply by esophagism, which does not go beyond the first period: the author, however, carefully seeking to study his observations, arrived at the result of a local cause resulting from food ingested quickly and therefore poorly chewed", leading at first to a spasmodic closure of the esophagus which, from intermittent, becomes increasingly pronounced, causing chronic inflammation of the walls of the esophagus, progressively leading to stenosis of the duct.
The food system adopted in @(Central Brazil) fits the interpretation given by &(GUISEZ) and the fact that we have not observed a single case of entrapment among the wealthier inhabitants, who therefore eat better, speaks in favor of this pathogenesis.
The diet of poor people consists almost exclusively of a mixture of flour and dried meat; the flour is usually of poor quality, thick and very hard and is likely to cause trauma to the walls of the esophagus: the explanation given by &(PARANHOS), admitting that the cause of the obstruction is poisoning due to the presence of toxic principles in the flour that were not eliminated by incomplete roasting, seems less likely to us.
There is one circumstance, however, that we would like to draw attention to. It was our intention to try to identify entallation as a known morbid manifestation, documenting the results of our investigations with citations. One doubt, however, remains in our minds; it is the one that refers to its frequency, which without exaggeration can be called epidemic, given the number of cases observed or known through information.
This fact deserves special attention, since, although dysphagia is a condition known throughout the world since ancient times, no author has ever pointed it out as frequent, with the exception perhaps of &(JEFFERYS) and &(MAXWELL), who found it in relative abundance in @(China), where, in fact, the use of cassava flour is completely unknown.
The dysphagia we have observed in a few hundred individuals may be an as yet undetermined condition; many of the people who suffer from it go for periods of days, weeks and even months, although rarely, without showing any abnormality.
Below we give the most interesting observations:


OBSERVATION I.


JC from SP - Ceará - 55 years old. Tall, well-built, he has suffered from the disease since 1872, when he was exactly 15 years old. Previous history: suddenly, while drinking water with great greed, after violent muscular efforts made when chasing a sheep, he had to run on foot for about two leagues, and fell unconscious; the next day he felt “full”, having taken several doses of purgatives.




[136]
He spent more than 2 days unconscious, without hearing anything and without being able to reconstruct what had happened during this period of time. Pathological antecedents: as a child he suffered from ophthalmia and was affected by malaria on several occasions; he had 10 siblings, of which 6 were still alive; his parents and siblings did not suffer from the disease, which is unknown in his homeland; he was affected by the illness in @(Caracol) @(Piauí), where we found him; according to his information, it was only after being affected by the enlargement that he became syphilitic due to the acquisition of a hard chancre.
Current status: He has syphilitic stigmata on his back and on the inner side of his thighs, a skin condition he has suffered from for 5 years, which we believe to be Eczema marginatum; for 1 year he had to walk on crutches as a result of an ulcer on his leg caused by a dog bite: the wound closed with mercury treatment.
Dysfajia: The patient has been suffering from “choking” for 40 years without interruption. He has difficulty swallowing solid foods, but this does not happen when they are chewed very well. For example, he eats corn or meat with brown sugar well, sometimes managing to finish the meal without choking. If he drinks water quickly, he gets “choked” during the last few sips.
Hot liquids are easily drunk and hot food causes less dysphagia and is more easily absorbed. From the age of 8, the patient has presented symptoms that make it possible to suspect that he has a stomach ulcer.
The “jamming” occurs right at the opening of the esophagus and sometimes 2 fingers below the furcula, as in the vast majority of cases we have observed. He does not suffer from heartburn; occasionally, he feels strong pain throughout the entire course of the esophagus, which stops immediately after taking a sip of cold water; he suffers from constant constipation; he eats beef, beans and rice.
taken in two meals, drinking coffee in the morning; the indentation has been getting worse and worse, and on one occasion, when he was eating flour with honey, he had to hang himself by his arms in order to “unindent” himself; he can only eat by helping himself to swallow with sips of water. Urine without albumin or sugar; perfect organs. He is sensitive to a certain degree of weight loss, due to not being able to eat properly.


OBSERVATION II.


@(S. Raimundo), 22-5-912; JJR, Brazilian, white, 23 years old. Medium height and healthy-looking. Three years ago he had a large abscess on his thigh, and was bedridden for about six months. When he recovered, he felt very weak and since then he began to have difficulty swallowing. At first he felt a certain embarrassment when swallowing food, but he could do without water. This condition worsened and, for about a year, he has needed to help each food bolus down the esophagus with water. He does not have spasms when eating mixed with any liquid, hot or cold, and only with solid foods, which are more easily swallowed when hot. He feels the embarrassment in the middle third of the esophagus. He does not suffer from heartburn, nor does he have spontaneous or provoked pain. He complains of stubborn constipation. Normal circulatory and respiratory systems. Normal thyroid, clear intelligence, aptitude for work. Negative history of syphilitics. The parents were robust and died at an advanced age; the father of cerebral congestion, and the mother of cardiac damage. He has a brother who is also congested. There are no other cases in the family.


OBSERVATION III.
@(Snail) @(Piauí) 23-5-1912).


MRS - 53 years old, white. Has suffered from intubation for 10 years. It started for no apparent reason, mildly, and gradually worsened until, in less than a year, he could not swallow without taking a sip of water with each food bolus. He feels the spasm with any solid or liquid food, except water.


[137]
There are times when he can swallow easily for days on end, sometimes for more than a week. There are other times when he gives up food because he is unable to swallow. Fortunately, he has not yet had to go more than a day without food.
There are seven cases of the disease in his family alone: he, his father, a brother, three nephews and an uncle. Outside the family, he knows five people suffering from the same illness. His father died in his 60s, from a syncope, having suffered from entrapment since he was 20. His uncle died at a very advanced age, having suffered from entrapment for over 30 years. He complains of constipation. He has no gastralgia, nor spontaneous or provoked pain in the epigastric region. Pyrosis sometimes. The spasm is felt in the upper third of the esophagus. He is a tall, thin but robust man, with normal respiratory and circulatory systems and thyroid. He works in the fields and cattle ranches in the caatingas.


OBSERVATION IV.
@(Snail) 27-5-1912.


JCR, 38 years old, brown, born in Bahia but living 6 leagues from Caracol since he was 6 years old. Farmer and cowboy. Tall man with a robust build. Until 3 years ago, he was in perfect health, despite having suffered from venereal diseases in his youth. Three years ago: after a bullfight, he arrived home very tired, and when he went to eat, he felt stuck, and could not swallow the food without the help of water. Since then, he can no longer swallow without the help of water, sometimes the water itself gets stuck and or he does not feel any stuckness at all. He complains of the house, and of cramps, sometimes violent, at the level of the navel. Sometimes he feels heartburn. He vomits sometimes. He has never vomited blood. He does not feel pain in the epigastrium, spontaneous or provoked. Circulatory and respiratory systems and thyroid are normal - spleen and liver are the same. He has a brother who has suffered from the same illness for two years, and another who is a victim of heart trouble.


OBSERVATION V.
@(Snail), 27-5-1912.


DLE-30 years old, white. Stuck since the age of 20, not knowing what to attribute the illness to; does not remember any accident or illness when he first felt the illness. Robust constitution, looks healthy. Sometimes feels dull pain in the epigastrium and a burning sensation, which causes abundant salivation. Rarely regurgitates food. Suffers from constipation that is not very rebellious. In the family, he has a brother and a sister-in-law suffering from the same illness, and his mother and aunt, victims of heart trouble.
He lost an uncle, who died very old, having suffered from enlargement for more than twenty years. The interesting thing is that having lived for three years in the city of @(Barra) @(Bahia), he almost recovered, but the condition worsened again when he returned to Caracol.


OBSERVATION VI.
Snail, 29-5-912.


Girls &(Anna Rita) — 9 years old, and &(Isabel) - 7 years old, sisters. The father is a robust man, and does not complain of anything. The mother is anemic and suffers from housework and embarrassment. &(Anna Rita) swallows with difficulty and often regurgitates food and water. There are times, however, when she swallows regularly and easily gets the embarrassment out with a little water; other times, to swallow she needs to walk, raise her arms, or lie down and roll on the floor. &(Izabel) is less constipated. The mother says that the problem appeared without any apparent cause. Food is well digested and the elimination of feces is daily and normal. Thyroid and circulatory and respiratory systems are normal. These girls look like all the girls in the place. Average height for their ages, thin and a little pale. They have two uncles who suffer from embarrassment, one of them, and embarrassment the other.


OBSERVATION VII.
@(Snail), 30-5-912.


AM-58 years old, born and always lived in @(Espírito Santo) three leagues from @(Caracol).


[138]
He has suffered from constipation for 14 years, and he doesn't know what to attribute it to. He knows that when the constipation appeared, he started to suffer from constipation, and that the more stubborn the constipation becomes, the worse it gets. When he defecates regularly, the constipation disappears, but it returns when he becomes constipated, which is his usual condition.
He has a son who is also stuck, and more so than him. He has worked as a cowboy since he was young, but he gave it up two years ago to become a farmer. In addition to the stuckness, he is also a victim of humiliation, having already had 4 attacks. His father died at the age of 70, and also suffered from the stuckness for many years. The consultant is a robust man.


OBSERVATION VIII.
@(Fish), 2-6- 912.


&(Josina) — 6 years old, has suffered from the condition for 8 months. Sometimes she gets stuck even with water. She has also been getting stuck at night with saliva. However, she spends days on end without feeling the slightest difficulty swallowing. She sometimes complains of colic. She goes two or three days without defecating. Normal thyroid. Her mother complains of palpitations and blurred vision. Josina's grandmother suffers from the condition and an uncle suffers from blockage.


OBSERVATION IX.


F., 45 years old, robust build. Has suffered from constipation since the age of 23. At first he tried to swallow without the aid of water, but was unable to do so. He has periods of greater or lesser embarrassment. Swallows better when he mixes the food with brown sugar. Obstinate constipation. Heartburn sometimes with abundant salivation. Absence of spontaneous or provoked pain in the epigastrium.
His mother, who has now passed away, suffered greatly from the humiliation and had repeated attacks. He also has a sister who suffers from the humiliation.
The general lines of these observations are those verified for all cases; the diagnosis is easy to establish due to the intermittency of the phenomena; in cases of a continuous illness, outside of these areas, a differential diagnosis will have to be established, mainly with esophageal diverticulum, esophagitis, tuberculosis, syphilis, ulcerations, scarring, esophageal paralysis, varicose veins; neoformations, compressions by aneurysms and even hysteria if there is a need to diagnose at all times.
In areas where the disease is widespread with the intensity seen in certain regions of @(Central Brazil), the probability of it being a general form of entrapment is very high. Prognosis: generally benign, with the patient's life not in danger except very rarely. Treatment: should be subordinate to the pathogenic cause which continues, in our opinion, to be completely ignored.


BIBLIOGRAPHY


&(BERNHEIM)
	1880
	Vid. OEsophagisme in Dictionnaire Encyclopedique des Sciences Médicale. Series 2. T. 14. pp. 520-539
Paris.
	&(BLONDEL, R.)
	1913
	Elude preparatory to an international review project on medical terminology. The Lancet, Vol. 2.—No 6 pp. 413-416. London.
	&(GBRITSCHEWSKY, G.)
	1906
	Die Versuche eíner rationellen Malaria bekaempfung in Russland. Zeits. f. Hyg. Bd. 54. pp. 227-246; Lpz.
	&(GUISEZ)
	1911
	Ce que doit être actuellement la conception des spasmes de Foesophage. La Presse Médicale, No 22 pp. 216-218. @(Paris) March
	&(JEFFERYS, HW) &
&(MAXWELL, LJ)
	1910
	The diseases of @(China) including @(Formosa) and Korea pp. 322-323. @(London).
	&(KRAUS, F.)
	1902
	Die Erkrankungeti der Mundhoehle und der Speiseroehre. in Pathologie und Therapie by H. NOTH-NAGEL Bd. 16. Vol, 1-pp. 112-121 - @(Vienna).
	&(PARANHOS, U.)
	1913
	Considerations sur le “mal d'engasgo". Buli, de la Soe. Pathol. exot. T. 7. No 1 pp. 47-60 @(Paris) Janeiro.
	

[139]


Embarrassment or Embarrassment of the heart.


Since @(Petrolina), we have been struck by the frequency, especially among women, of a very curious nervous manifestation, which the #sertanejos call “vexame do coração” or simply “vexame”.
This is a morbid manifestation, rarely fatal, very common among women, rare in men, which we cannot identify with hysteria, epilepsy or any of the known neuroses. This manifestation was observed in the areas affected by droughts, which we traveled through, from @(Petrolina) to @(Formosa), disappearing completely as soon as we entered the humid areas of @(Goiás). Frequently in women, it also affects men, to a very small extent, and rarely in children. In the language of the #sertanejo, the crisis manifests itself by a pounding in the heart (palpitations), darkening of the vision, and loss of consciousness, with no contractions, convulsions, sweats, screams or moans. The crisis can be caused by “fright or resentment” or any setback, but it occurs constantly regardless of any pretext.
As a general rule, patients state categorically that they do not feel the urge to scream or struggle. There is no thermal reaction, nor any disturbance of the respiratory or circulatory rhythms during the crisis, except in the first moments, when there are heart palpitations. The crisis can last from minutes to hours. Once it is over, the patient returns to her activities, feeling only a certain general lassitude or lethargy. In general, the patient retains her memory and it is relatively common for patients who, although unable to speak or move, can hear what is happening around them, and even retain a certain sensitivity.
There are cases in which there is no loss of senses, only of speech and movement. There are other, rare cases, in which there is temporary paresis or paralysis of one or more limbs, which lasts from hours to months, eventually disappearing without any treatment. There are also benign cases in which the crisis is limited to a passing vertigo. It is rare for a sufferer of this illness not to complain of constipation, with the crises worsening or repeating as the constipation becomes more intense. This morbid manifestation of
chronicle has enormous extension, a true epidemic character in the dry areas we traveled through, in the municipalities of @(Petrolina) @(Pernambuco) and @(S. Raimundo Nonato), @(Parnaguá) and @(Corrente), @(Piauí), where surely more than 50% of the women who sought us out complained of the “embarrassment”, to which, in fact, they do not attach great importance, as it is a “common” evil that does not kill, they say.
The habit of smoking a pipe and chewing tobacco is widespread among women in the Northeast, and many of them go to sleep with a piece of tobacco (chew) in their mouths, to the point that they sometimes wake up almost suffocated by the mixture of smoke and saliva. We thought of attributing this more or less intense state of dizziness to tobacco poisoning. However, we saw the same habit of chewing and smoking a pipe widely spread among lower-class women in the interior of Minas Gerais, especially in the


[140]


north of the State, where one of us (B. Penna) remained for three years, and our attention was never drawn to this fact, because we do not remember having been consulted even once about such an affection.
But on this same excursion in the @(northeast) where, without exaggeration, more than 50% of the consultants from the dry zones complained of these crises, they gradually diminished until they disappeared when we entered the humid regions of @(Goiás), where the pernicious habit of chewing and smoking a pipe is also inveterate among women. In addition, the use and abuse of tobacco is universal, the bibliography on its consequences is colossal, and nothing similar to this morbid manifestation that we observed in the @(northeast) is found. Rare is the woman in the @(northeast) (in the regions we visited) who does not complain of ovarian disorders, dysmenorrhea, irregular menstruation, almost all of which are “dismantled” in their picturesque language. This is, however, a common fact in the lower classes of @(Brazil), from @(Amazonas) to @(Rio Grande do Sul). These disorders do not, however, prevent conception, and the women of the @(northeast) are very prolific. We do not believe that the vexation can be classified as uterine neurosis. Given its epidemic nature, limited to the drier regions we have visited, it is quite possible that it is a nervous disorder of unknown etiology; it is enough to remember that there are men who have been attacked by the disease to rule out this hypothesis. We have carried out numerous blood tests and inoculations of this in guinea pigs, always with negative results. We have also carried out fecal tests, where we have found the common parasites. However, we have not had the opportunity to practice
autopsies and collecting material for laboratory studies Our examinations suffered from deficiencies typical of an excursion with limited time frames. This condition, which we cannot determine, is not serious and there are women, aged 60 to 70, who have suffered from it for 20, 30 or more years.
Rare fatal cases have been reported during the crisis, and these may be due to other causes.
A very interesting fact that should be noted is the concomitance, in these parts, of the vexation or vexation of the heart* peculiar to women in dry areas, with that other nervous manifestation, more peculiar to men, the spasmodic dysphasia, there called entalo* entalação, and in @(Minas), mal de engasgo* already described in another chapter. In the few families in which one of these manifestations does not exist, the other does not exist either. However, we did not find a single family in which, with one or more people with entanglements, usually men, there were not women and men, sometimes, reporting the vexation and vice versa.
In both of these manifestations, home-made (intestinal constipation) is constant and the crises are aggravated by the intensity of the constipation. The most abundant regions of blockages are also those of patients with vexame; where one illness is scarce, the other is scarce. Both of these conditions appear suddenly, often manifesting themselves at an advanced age. Both, however, generally appear after the age of 20. Both rarely affect children, and the disease of choking or blockage, from this point of view, is more frequent. We have seen three children (9 and 7 years old and another 6 months old) suffering from blockage*, among them, one was a nursing child and only one had vexame. Rarely does the same individual present both manifestations. However, there are cases of this, and we have seen two blockages who also suffered from vexame. Humiliation is common in women, and entrapment in men, but both, although in small proportions, also present the evil peculiar to each sex.
We saw a family of 6 members; father, mother and four children (2 couples) in which the father and sons suffered from entrapment and the mother and daughters from “embarrassment”.
There are families in which only one or two of their members suffer from one or another illness.


[141]
What often happens, however, is the existence of several cases of one and the other evil, with a predominance of entrapment in men, and of “vexame” in women? The proportion of men affected by embarrassment is greater than that of women attacked by entrapment.
From our observations, among the patients examined, the proportion of the former is about 10%, and only 3% of the women in relation to the onset. Despite the noted concomitance, we believe, however, that each of these manifestations is a separate condition. In addition to clinically being different manifestations, we know of the existence, in @(Minas), of mal de engasgo, without the slightest reference to “vexame” until now, and we ourselves have encountered dozens of cases of mal de engasgo in our extensive journey through the State of @(Goiás), without observing a single case of vexation.
Without being able to confirm anything due to lack of time, information and special knowledge, we leave these observations here so that neuropathologists and scholars, with more information, can resolve the matter. We believe that the study of the condition we report is of great scientific interest. In the books and magazines we consulted, we found nothing that could be identified with heart trouble. However, in the year LXI No. 2, pp. 60-64 of “Muench. Med, Wochenschr” of January 1914 there is an article signed by &(LEBER, A.) and &(VON PROWAZEK) and entitled “Chelnot manengheng hâlm-tans (Die kalte Wdldkrankheit der Chamosro)" where the authors describe an illness that, despite some disagreements, presents an analogy with the vexation of the heart of the #sertão of @ (northeast Brazil). It is a disease that begins in adolescence, and is characterized by a sudden attack of unconsciousness, most often when the victims are working in the forest; hence the name given by the natives of the @ (Islas dos Ladrões) and @ (Marianas), where the illness was observed, of “cold illness of the forest”, and - attributed to the spirits that frequent them. The attacks vary from a few minutes to 24 hours and the rule is that there is no convulsions, which, however, can sometimes be observed. In general, an aura appears taking the form of figures or even voluptuous sensations. The cases seem to be observed only among men and boys (just the opposite of what is seen in the @(northeast)). The authors report 5 cases and provide an excellent bibliography. They believe that the disease presents analogies with epilepsy and with the Malayan Amok.


OBSERVATION I.
@(Snail), 24-5-912
4


AP—21 years old, white, married - Weak constitution. She had her first attack five years ago. Since then, they have been recurring, sometimes frequently, sometimes at intervals, with a one-year interval. The attack manifests itself as tingling in the feet and hands, palpitations and dizziness, sometimes fleeting, sometimes lasting for half an hour, without screams, convulsions or contractions. After the attack, she drinks a little water and returns to her activities. Menstruation is normal. She complains of insomnia, loss of appetite and constipation. Normal circulatory and respiratory systems. Normal thyroid. She has a 2-year-old daughter. She has not had any other births before or since these, nor have any miscarriages. Her father and a brother are victims of the entrapment.


OBSERVATION II.
@(Snail). 31-5-916
CJ da S.-24 years old, born and resident in @(“Jurema”), six leagues from Caracol. He has frequent crises, saying he feels a pounding in his heart (palpitations), dark vision, falling and losing consciousness, without screaming or convulsions, just like the common crisis in women. His father, a robust man, has suffered from constipation for over 20 years and is currently 61 years old. He only complains of constipation.
He is a man of above average height, of robust build, with no history of syphilitic disease.


[142]
Normal heart rhythm, and normal respiratory system.


OBSERVATION III
@(Snail), May 912


MG - 22 years old, single. She had her first seizure two months ago, which came on unexpectedly when she was having a natural conversation with relatives, without having been “frightened or resentful”, she felt “embarrassed in her heart”, her vision went black and she lost consciousness, without screaming or struggling, and she remained like that for about an hour. When she came to, she felt weak and tired. After that, she had another full-blown seizure. Before that, however, she had already felt the embarrassment, without losing consciousness. Irregular periods - She sleeps and eats regularly. Slight constipation. Normal thyroid, circulatory and respiratory systems, as well as spleen and liver. Her father and an uncle suffer from constipation. Her mother has no complaints.


OBSERVATION IV.
@(Snail), May 912


MT da C., 25 years old, mixed race, married for 5 years. She has had five miscarriages between 1 and 3 months. While single, she was in perfect health, having had her first crisis a year after her marriage. The crises sometimes repeat themselves two or three times in the same day, and the slightest inconvenience or fright is enough to provoke them. They manifest themselves in the manner already described and sometimes last for hours. We provoked a crisis in this patient, which lasted 1 hour. This is a more serious case.
than those observed until then. The patient has very weak patellar reflexes and paresis in the upper and lower limbs on the right side. Dysmenorrhea, housework and repeated headaches. She says, however, that she eats regularly and does not suffer from insomnia. Normal thyroid, as well as normal circulatory and respiratory systems.


OBSERVATION V.
@(Snail) - June 1912
 
CM-29 years old, married for three years. Had a full-term birth and an abortion. Has suffered from humiliation since she was single, which her deceased mother also suffered from, and two sisters still suffer from. Her father is a bit of a wimp. Does not suffer from housework (constipation). Robust woman, with all the normal equipment.


OBSERVATION VI.
@(Battle) - June 1912 (Piauhí)


M. de J. - 24 years old, brown, married, has suffered from the humiliation since she was 14 years old. However, she does not lose her senses, because she says that during the crisis she hears and sees what is happening around her, but loses her speech and movement. She only complains of dysmenorrhea and constipation.
And more or less this is how the numerous cases we have observed are.


Malaria


Malaria is certainly the greatest scourge in dry areas; when we arrived in @(Juazeiro) at the end of March, malaria was rampant, with both malignant and benign forms prevailing; we did not observe any cases of quartan.
Fortunately, however, even clinically severe cases were easily treated with small doses of quinine hydrochloride (0.50-1.0 grams via the stomach). The population has no idea about the benefits of this alkaloid and there we only found the commercially known quinine sulfate used sparingly, precisely the salt of least value due to the small percentage of the alkaloid it contains. In the only existing hospital, a large mansion that only admitted 12 patients due to the lack of resources of the municipality and lacking any improved facilities, we examined the register from its beginning and found a large number of entries labeled “entered dying”, which we interpreted as malaria; in fact we were surprised by the small number of people registered under any heading that designated malaria, a fact in contrast to what we were observing and whose explanation could only be given by the lack of knowledge still


[143]
existing among patients and doctors, that the initial chill may cease to exist, as we observed in @(Xerém), in many cases of malignant tertian diagnosed under the microscope.
Specific medication is only used in desperate cases, and even then, in addition to using the most inappropriate salt, they do so in insufficient doses. As in several parts of Brazil, we have observed the great repugnance that people have for quinine, which, in those parts, is difficult to use due to its high price; it is sold at 500 reais for every 30 centigrams and constitutes a “quinine purgative” which is weighed with 37 grains of black pepper, depending on whether the dose is single or double.
It can be well assessed by the delayed way of weighing the medicine and even more, by the name of “double dose”, which is given to 0.60 centigr. of commercial quinine sulfate of dubious purity, as the only effective medication for malaria, it is little used.
In general, the common people treat themselves with infusions made with the flower or leaves of the “catinga de porco” and the bark of the juazeiro tree, and they harbor erroneous prejudices about the disease, such as not drinking milk when one is sick. This nonsense is used even among educated people, and the disadvantages become clear when one considers that children are prevented from using a dairy diet, which is replaced by another diet derived from the food in use there, which is already so imperfect in itself.
The ideas regarding the etiology of malaria are among the most primitive; in this regard, the populations of dry regions are no exception to the generalized way of thinking among the popular classes of the entire nation; there, as elsewhere, it is the local fruits that produce malaria; the influence of the disease caused by the culicides is not even remotely suspected, a fact that is not surprising since, with rare exceptions, the few doctors found in those areas do not give it credit or ignore it.
However, instinctively the large bodies of water remain uninhabited, an observation that greatly surprises travelers to those semiarid regions, who, upon learning the reasons that dictate such a procedure, are told that such sites have been abandoned due to the seasons. Anyone leaving the village of Caracol bound for Parnaguá in Piauí will be able to verify what we say: the banks of the Missão, Ibiraba, Tabocas and the place called Ipueras lagoons are uninhabited, because the residents flee from malaria; and there is reason for this, because even in June C. argyrotarsis are very abundant; and it is also clear that, because the municipality of Parnaguá has a greater abundance of water, malaria is more abundant than in S. Raymundo. This issue is of great importance to the (Inspectorate of Works against Droughts), as it concerns the consequences arising from the installation of large dams, which, installed close to population centers, could increase malaria if measures are not taken to mitigate malaria to a large extent, and could even be avoided if, by chance, certain measures were rigorously implemented.
On a certain scale, we can observe what we are saying in the dam under construction in the village of S. Raymundo Nonato, where the number of workers there, more than 100, was suffering from malaria, in the proportion of 60% according to the observations we made between May 3rd and 20th. Between the dilemma of providing water, where there is little, and that of causing the development of malaria, a preventable and curable disease, no one hesitates. Without a doubt, the prophylactic measures will bring a certain increase in expenses, but one day the Nation will finally understand the need to more effectively support areas that until recently were unfairly abandoned by the public authorities.
The measures we would recommend are the following, dictated by knowledge
of the biology of the transmitters we found. Of the anopheline species, there for us


[144]
verified, only two require the attention of the &(Inspectorate). We refer to Cellia argyritarsis ROB, DESV. and Cellia albimana WIED; these are the only ones responsible for malaria in the entire region covered; we found one or the other, everywhere there was running or still water; from the banks of the @(S. Francisco) to the @(Capital of Goiás), with the exception of some uninhabited tracts of land. Cellia argyritarsis is the transmitting species par excellence in those areas. The first Cellia albirnaua WIED, was caught on May 21,
1912, in @(Caracol). In fact, the species in question, based on the patterns of the palps, should be identified as Cellia tarsimaculata GOELDI, according to the criteria of North American authors. In flowing rivers, the larvae develop in the backwaters, near the banks, in places where aquatic vegetation accumulates and in the pools left by the low tide, which multiplies the foci and causes epidemics to break out due to the large development of transmitters. In any collection of still water, be it called a cacimba, cauldron, Yankee and similar names, the larvae of the anophelines mentioned can develop. &(GORGAS), in @(Panama), the relationship between the number of stegomyias and the production of cases of yellow fever can be studied; practically, a large number of these insects are necessary for a few mosquitoes to be able to infect a man; from the egg to the image, any culicina has to overcome multiple causes of destruction.
&(ROSS), in the work entitled The prevention of Malaria, 1910, spends the entire chapter 5% studying the laws that regulate the increase of malaria in a given location. There are more than 100 pages, where the author reviews the studies previously carried out by other researchers and whose results are expressed by algebraic formulas, since the study of malaria epidemiology achieved such precision.
Simultaneously with the work of &(ROSS), an article by H. WA1TE entitled “Mosquitoes and malaria. A study of the relation between the number of mosquitoes in a locality and the malaria rate” appeared in the journal Biometrika Vol. VII, Part. IV, the conclusions of which were formulated in a manner analogous to those stated in the work of &(ROSS); it is therefore a well-known subject, protected from the instability of hypotheses and presumptions.
It is not difficult to follow the ROSS formulas stated in two important equations: the first is called the variation formula and indicates the way in which malaria varies in a given location:


  

In the equation, /m/; is the proportion of infected people at the beginning of the research; the proportion of anophelines for each person; ra the average cure; ba the proportion of anophelines that fed on people; sa the proportion of anophelines in which the parasites managed to develop; ia the proportion of cases carrying gametes; m¹ the proportion of infected people at the end of the research period (inquiry).
The second formula is called the static formula and represents the final or static level M, to which the proportion of infected people falls, according to the proportion of anopheles and
the other factors remain more or less constant.
The static formula is as follows:
  

The exact numerical values of b, s, i do not affect the validity of the above equations.
An impermeable soil under certain leveling conditions, with a larger water surface, tends to increase the number of anophelines. Increased rainfall not only increases the number of mosquitoes, but also the recurrences, thus increasing the b factor and reducing the r factor. Increased drought can reduce r greatly; increased temperature causes an increase in all factors except for very prolonged droughts greatly reduce the a, b, and s factors, and can increase Z.
When droughts strike for a few successive years, almost all values are extremely reduced; the value i increases


[145]
However, in years of harsh winters with exceptional rainfall, factors a, b, s are greatly reduced, and there is an increase in the factor.
Still on this subject, you can find in vol. 50-No. 18 pp. 877-878, Oct. 1911 in the "Medical Record” of @(New York) an excellent article by &(STEDMAN) entitled "Malaria and mathematics”.
In reservoirs, prophylaxis must aim to combat anopheline larvae and fortunately the measures to be taken are well known. In general, anophelines have different habits, already known from the work of entomologists from various countries. However, some facts about the biology of these larvae are uniform and among these is the way they float in a horizontal position; from this fact originated the prophylaxis advocated by &(HP JOHNSON) and published in 1902, in an appendix, in the Annual Rept. @(New Jersey) Agric. Exp. Sta, under the direction of &(JB SMITH), which consisted of covering the water surface with plants belonging to the Lemnaccae; 2 years later &(ADIE) praised the results obtained in @(India) with the application of Lemna minor (Ind. Med. Gaz. Vol. 39 No 6-1904 and &(P. HEHIR) in Prophylaxis of malaria in @(India) 1910 and &BENTLEY) in the article The natural history of Bombay mataria (Journal Bombay Natur. Hist. Soc. Vol. 20, pp. 392-422—1910), continued to advocate the use not only of Lemna and Wolffia, but also of another aquatic plant of the Salviniacea family and belonging to the Azolla genus, whose use in anti-larval prophylaxis had been launched by the Wilhelmshaven Malaria Station.
The use of these plants is based on the fact that their growth occurs so intensely and is so contiguous that the entire liquid surface is covered by a veritable mantle of greenery, a circumstance that would impede larval respiration and therefore lead to death by asphyxiation.
In the State of Piauí, we have had the opportunity to find water bodies covered by representatives of Wolffia on more than one occasion, but whether there or elsewhere, there is only rarely a complete covering without any break in continuity; with representatives of the genus Azolla, the covering is not so perfect, since these plants need shade in order to develop. The experiments carried out by D. Costa Lima on the development of larvae that are completely submerged and prevented from breathing, and which still manage to transform into adults, devalue the prophylactic methods based on the use of these plants. The use of larval destruction obtained by fish is very popular and advocated, and the list of published works on this subject is enormous; but we would like to draw attention to one fact: the use of this means of destruction only yields results with culicine larvae; with anopheline larvae, due to the position they occupy in the water, the results are completely flawed. We had ample proof of this during the excursion, the results of which we are now presenting. Once, at dusk, we camped on the shore of a certain lake and throughout the night we were atrociously tormented by exclusively feline anopheles. The abundance was such that it was difficult to sleep and, despite our repeated searches, we were unable to capture any specimen of any species other than C. argyrotarsis. At dawn, we went to investigate the conditions of the lake and were unable to find a single larva of culicina, but instead managed to collect many anophelines;
The lagoon was abundantly populated by fish and, probably, it was due to this fact that no culicine larvae were found, contrary to what was observed with anopheline larvae, which escaped destruction due to the position they occupy on the surface of the water.
When we carried out the anti-malarial campaign in @(Xerem), we observed a similar fact in certain places populated by fish and where the number of anophelines was large.
In the article “Some observations on the bionornies and breeding-places of Anopheles in Saint-Lucia, British West Indies (Bull of


[146]
entom. Research, Vol. 111, Part III — pp. 251* 277 Nov. 1912) &(NiCHOLLS) publishes the results of his observations and experiments on exactly the same two species of anophelines observed on our excursion. Placing anopheline and stegomyia larvae in places populated by fish known to be Jarvivorous, he was able to verify after 36 hours that only the anopheline larvae remained, which had suffered little. However, anopheline larvae only escape in such large proportions from such voracious enemies if, by chance, they develop in waters containing vegetation, even if this is formed by the filamentous masses of Spirogyra and other Zygnemaceae: in these conditions the larvae easily hide and are therefore spared.
Now, any prophylaxis that one wants to establish in reservoirs must inevitably attend to the cleaning of any and all vegetation that develops on their surface. It is known that mosquito larvae, especially those of Anophelinae, do not develop in places where the body of water is deep; therefore, mosquito larvae are not found a few meters from the banks of reservoirs, unless there is floating vegetation of any kind.
In the lagoon of @(Parnaguá) @(Piauí), we can study this issue in a perfectly elucidative way; the larvae of culicids were only found at most 2 meters away from the
margin, if it happened to have grass vegetation; it was useless to look for them beyond; but if the banks were full of Eichornia azurea KUNTH or species of the genera Nymphea SMITH or even Cabomba piauhiensis GARD, forming beds that extended into the lagoon, one could carefully surprise anopheline larvae that protected themselves under the leaves or adhered to these plants.
Any and all reservoirs without vegetation or floating debris, populated by fish, will not constitute a breeding ground for the disease; cleaning must be more scrupulous near the banks. Years ago, we had the opportunity to observe a large breeding ground for the anophelines in question, in a large water tank belonging to the Carioca Textile Factory in the Botanical Garden; in fact, there was no vegetation in the water, but small fragments of wood were scattered throughout the surface, which served as support for the anopheline larvae. This should not be taken to mean that it is impossible to completely clean the surface of a reservoir; a simple partial cleaning yields immense results.
The installation of an anti-malarial clinic in localities where there is a doctor does not seem difficult to achieve; let us take as an example the city of @(Joazeiro) where, under current conditions, malaria is rampant in all parts of the city. It would not be impossible to install a medical clinic there by taking advantage of local resources and, from what we have seen, it is relatively easy to rid the most populated part of the city of malaria.
The State and the Municipality would be very interested in supporting such measures and we believe that the results would not be long in coming. Such measures are currently used in all malaria regions and are therefore not just an experiment. In this regard, Argentina is already far ahead of us and, despite being a federation with a constitutional regime similar to ours, the central government has had the means to intervene in the States to provide anti-malarial prophylaxis; to this end, it had to set up an autonomous department responsible for intervening in all States where malaria is rampant. We had the opportunity to see a Medical Center for Malaria in Tucuman and can therefore fully appreciate its advantages.
In @(Juazeiro) something similar could be done and the Post that operated in this location would also help the city of @(Petrolina) in Pernambuco. We are witnesses to the
devastation caused by malaria in those areas and the measures we propose are very easy to implement and relatively inexpensive; in addition to the doctor's stipend, the clinic would have to provide quinine free of charge and it seems impossible that the


[147]
Municipality, State and Union are unable to meet such costs, especially since quinine salts could be directly purchased abroad.
When one imagines the heroic campaign waged by Italy, which began about 10 years ago, using all the means recommended by science and carried out on a scale never seen before in the world, and despite the great works of sanitary engineering and the use of all modern mechanical and chemical preventive measures, all the processes of propaganda and popularization of preventive measures in popular conferences, lectures in all public schools, the installation of an extraordinary number of medical posts, and finally, a small army of officials of all categories, dedicated exclusively to preventive service, and which, despite the use of 42 tons of quinine in 1911, saw almost 5,000 of its children die from malaria, one can then perhaps imagine the destruction caused by malaria among populations living at will in terms of medical care. Among the impaludados of @(Joazeiro) and @(S. Raimundo Nonato) which, by their number, offered a greater field of observation, we can still verify quite interesting facts for knowledge
the biology of malaria parasites and how they behave in the presence of quinine.
In @(Xerem) and @(Itapura), where we were in charge of anti-malarial prophylaxis, we were struck by the curious circumstance that it was precisely in the months when malaria reached its peak that there was an absence of gametes, a statement that, if proven, would be at odds with the current exclusivist viewpoint, which requires the mandatory presence of gamete carriers in order for the &(ROSS) cycle to operate in all its classic phases.
In @(Juazeiro) and @(S. Raymundo), we observed the same fact; all the malaria victims submitted to microscopic examination only had hematozoa in the schizogonic stage. If this is the rule, we must necessarily admit that the transmitting mosquitoes can transmit malaria independently of the sexual forms in the blood. Our observations in various parts of @(Brazil) have gathered enough elements to lead us to the conviction that this does in fact happen.
Another interesting point is the relative nature of the races of hemozoa resistant to quinine, a subject that we have already dealt with in a previous work published in the Memoirs of the Oswaldo Cruz Institute. In that publication, in order to explain numerous and obvious facts about the resistance acquired by hematozoa against quinine, we believed in the possibility of resistance to the alkaloid occurring in the exogenous cycle of the parasite.
&(NOCHT) and &(WERNER) of the &(Institute of Tropical Medicine in Hamburg), in a study subsequent to ours, admitting the races of quinine-resistant hematozoa, based on the observation of some patients from Mamoré and observed by them, interpreted the phenomenon of resistance as having to operate in the endogenous cycle of Plasmodium itself. The facts observed in @(Juazeiro) lead us to believe that the truth lies on both sides, since in some cases observed by us in @(Xerem), there were individuals who had only slept there for one night and who nevertheless became infected despite being quinized, demonstrating that the initial form of hematozoan, released into the blood by the transmitting anopheline, was already quinine-resistant, since it was not destroyed by the alkaloid given prophylactically.
The great efficacy and rapidity of action demonstrated by quinine in seriously ill patients, who certainly in the south of the country required the use of a higher dose of the alkaloid, led us to the conviction that quinine resistance also occurs in the schizogonic cycle; the ease in overcoming the disease there can only be explained by the disuse, as already mentioned, of quinine salts in those parts. Admitting this hypothesis, it can be understood that, in an infected individual treated with insufficient doses of quinine, the hematozoa that did not die are capable of presenting in the presence of the




[148]
alkaloid, a certain resistance to which will increase if the doses used continue to be small.
In the @(S. Francisco) area, the dose of 0.60 g of commercial quinine sulfate, one of the lowest alkaloid salts, is considered enormous; we prescribed one gram of hydrochloride in two capsules at once and another of 0.50 for 8-10 hours after ingesting the first ones; the results were extraordinary, even in cases considered serious.
Now, in the south of the country or rather, in certain areas, where due to circumstances the use of quinine quickly became common, such as among railway workers, who medicated themselves, it may be noted after some time that malaria patients were resistant to specific treatment and the doctor would see that the therapeutic dose, initially used with complete success, gradually became insufficient, making it necessary to increase not only the dose, but also the dose.
quantity, as well as duration, demonstrating the possibility of the patient himself establishing, through initially small doses of quinine taken for a short period of time, races of hematozoa resistant to the alkaloid, even when used in doses considered toxic.
It should not be inferred that we in any way wish to applaud the scarcity of quinine use in those regions; on the contrary, cases of quinine resistance are relatively few in number and are generally only observed in special conditions where quinine use is intense, in services where vigorous anti-malarial prophylaxis is required. Apart from this, quinine-resistant cases, although they cannot be considered exceptional, are undoubtedly rare.


Tuberculosis


This scourge is much more abundant in the backlands than is generally thought; under a microscope, we can often diagnose the disease.


Syphilis


It is certainly even more widespread than in the populated centers of the country; it exists on a large scale in the most remote parts of the railway; the large number of abortions is explained by the number of luetics.


Yaws


Somehow, we were surprised by the absence of this disease, which we expected to find very abundant. The only two cases seen and whose smears were diagnosed using the :&(BURRI) method, were observed in the State of @(Goiás) on the route from @(Vila Duro) to the city of @(Porto Nacional); from the information we learned that yaws was more abundant in the north of the region we were traveling through.


Leprosy


We did not have the opportunity to observe a single case in the states of @(Bahia), @(Pernambuco) and @(Piauí), although residents sometimes referred to their presence.
which should be considered rare in the regions traveled in these States. We found it in the State of @(Goiás), rare in the northern part, more abundant in the south of the State, mainly between the cities of @(Goiás) and @(Anhanguera) where, from the information collected, it seems to be relatively common.


Leishmaniasis


Throughout the entire route, we did not find a single case, although our attention was especially focused on the subject, since we did not find Phleboiomus, whose absence caused us great interest, since we are among those who believe that the disease is transmitted by this dipteran. Therefore, we tried to carefully verify whether or not the absence of the supposed transmitter was related to leishmaniasis. Throughout the entire route, we were only able to capture 3 specimens of Phlebotomus, 1 in a buriti palm grove in the “gerals” of Bahia and 2 in the woods near the city of @(Goiás). However, we learned from information from several people about the existence of the “ferida brava” in the extreme north of @(Goiás).


[149]
from @(Pedro Afonso) to the north, where the "tatuquiras", the common name for sandflies there and in @(Amazon), are very abundant.


HEINE-MEDIN disease


We verified 3 cases, 1 in @(Petrolina) @(Pernambuco) and 2 in @(Capital of Goiás) and, through information from doctors, we learned of its existence in @(Juazeiro).


Diphtheria


From the information we have verified the existence of the disease in several locations; therapeutic serum treatment, even in places where it is available, is almost never used; it is known by the name of garrotilho.


Filariasis


We observed only 6 to 8 cases of elephantiasis in passers-by in @(Capital of Bahia);
This condition is certainly growing in that city, throughout the rest of the route we had no opportunity to verify any other case.


carbuncle


As this disease frequently attacks livestock, especially goats where it exists, human infection accidents are relatively common. In general, the local people know it by the corruption of "crabunco", which they differentiate between black and white, depending on whether the pustule is purple or slightly reddish. Contamination is carried out by removing the skin of the "infested" animal, which is used for export; this practice is followed everywhere, except in the village of Duro, where the animal is completely discarded. Other times, the individual becomes infected when preparing meat from an apparently healthy animal; in these cases, it is clear that the animal was suffering from an intestinal form of anthrax. Cowherds are the most affected, which is understandable; the number of deaths from anthrax is, according to the information, quite high. The notions about contagiousness are unfortunately erroneous and in @(Parnaguá village), they told us
the sad episode of an individual who, upon learning that a cow had died of carbuncles, did not hesitate to use the meat after having rubbed it with garlic, which throughout the backlands is considered to have extraordinary antiseptic properties. A few days later, the unfortunate man died of carbuncles.
Dysentery


Like almost all diseases, this illness is common only during the "green season", as the rainy season is called there; we are inclined to believe that the condition described by the residents can only be related to bacterial dysentery, since we never found the presence of amoebas in the hundreds of people of all ages whose feces were examined. Therefore, we assume that amoebic dysentery must be rare, since no carriers of amoebas were found, which would probably be the case if the rhizopods in question were in fact responsible for the dysenteric forms described by the inhabitants. Nor have liver abscesses been observed, according to information from local clinicians. In certain areas of the municipality of @(Sta. Rita do Rio Preto), dysentery or dysenteriform diarrhea is called "jôga".
Periodically, smallpox epidemics occur, causing great terror; nowhere did we observe any knowledge among people about the presence of milkpox (alastrim) nor was there any other common name that recalled the disease.
However, from the news we have obtained in some locations, and from the observation of an epidemic spreading throughout almost the entire municipality of @(Porto Nacional) @(Goiás) we can confirm its existence in @(Central Brazil).
In the village @(Parnaguá), for example, a few years before our visit there, an intense epidemic had broken out, identified as smallpox by the residents, but,
[150]
which, however, did not cause any deaths. In @(Formosa), we were told of a major epidemic that spread in 1808 throughout the municipality of @(Sta. Rita) where, however, in addition to a certain mortality and recovery with characteristic scarring, great benignity was observed for individuals covered in pustules who easily recovered, without remaining with scars. It can be assumed that, in this case, there was the simultaneous presence of the two morbid entities. In a place called @(Peixe), municipality of @(Porto Nacional), @(Goiás) there had been, shortly before our visit, an epidemic that affected about 600 people from the locality and surrounding areas, causing only 16 deaths; the same fact was observed in the town of @(Descoberto); in fact, the prevailing opinion, as can be read in &(H. DE ARAGÃO) -(Memórias do &(Instituto Oswaldo Cruz), T. 3. fac.2 paj. 309-318. Studies on Alastrim - 1911) is that alastrim spread in Brazil coming from the Bahian banks of the @(S. Francisco).
The impression of those who travel to these areas, where most of the inhabitants are not vaccinated, is that smallpox vera does not cause the devastation that one would assume. The number of carriers of smallpox scars is small, and this fact immediately draws the attention of anyone who, with a foresighted mind, wants to observe it. The question of the identity between smallpox and alastrim continues to be debated in science, with many authors admitting that they are the same disease with varying degrees of virulence; for those who think so, the unvaccinated populations of @(Central Brazil), periodically visited by smallpox epidemics, always with low lethality, will not fail to find arguments that favor their point of view.
When one considers that in the 1908 smallpox epidemic in Rio de Janeiro, the fatality rate reached 60%, one cannot help but be surprised that a similar fact does not occur in populations where the conditions for propagation are undoubtedly much more favorable and, as the hypothesis of one germ immunizing another is still rejected to this day, the epidemiological data on this subject collected by us in those places insensibly leads us to believe that smallpox is in fact an attenuated form of smallpox, because, otherwise, if this were not the case, smallpox epidemics with high mortality rates would certainly have been recorded, alongside those with low fatalities. This fact is not observed, not only due to the aforementioned presence of a small number of people with smallpox scars, but also due to the unanimous information obtained throughout the route, regarding the long-standing non-existence of any smallpox epidemic causing great mortality.
In the @(northeast) the number of people affected by eye diseases is highly impressive; conjunctivitis and even contagious ophthalmia are extremely frequent, with a notable predominance in children up to the age of 12. However, we believe we can say one thing: trachoma is part of the population in a certain proportion of
prevailing conjunctivitis.
In @(Peixe) (Municipality of @(Remanso) @(Bahia), on a farm where we were resting in the Municipality of @(Barra) in the same State, we came across 3 very suspicious patients. In the first location, they were two children who presented the characteristic reduction of the eyelid opening, intense conjunctivitis, without us being able, however, to verify the presence of granulations. The 3rd case was that of an elderly woman and a carrier of entropion. In @(Juazeiro) and other riverside towns of @(S. Francisco), the disease must in all probability exist, not only because they are in easy communication with Bahian towns already contaminated by the disease, but also because the presence of Syrians is numerous, as observed mainly in the Pernambuco city called @(Petrolina).
The (Inspectorate) should send a specialist to competently study the matter.
In a thesis entitled “Study on trachoma” that Dr. J. Felix Ribeiro presented to the Faculty of Medicine of Bahia in 1914, it can be seen that many locations in the interior of the State


[151]
are already infected with trachoma. In 1915, Dr. P. de B. Barbosa Lima defended at the Faculty of Rio the interesting doctoral work “On Trachoma in Brazil”, which shows that the author considers Ceará to be one of the most important centers in the north of Brazil.
In the 1915 edition of the Jornal do Comércio, the illustrious Dr. Raul David de Sanson published a valuable article under the heading “Trachoma in Brazil” in which we are informed about the abundance of trachoma in the interior of Ceará. According to the report that the specialist presented to the Director of the Immigrant Hostel on Flores Island on February 18, 1916, it can be seen that, of the 4,846 migrants, mainly from Ceará, examined by Dr. Raul de Sanson, 80 had trachoma. Unfortunately, the disease is much more common in those parts than we had imagined. In the caatinga region, where thorny trees are the rule, there is a notable number of people, generally male, with "belly burns" (pterijios); as soon as the area changes, the conditions in this regard fall back to the normality observed everywhere, and since the profession of almost all men is that of cowboy, constantly subject to trauma, we do not know if there is a connection between one thing and the other. Feeling our incompetence, especially in the chapter we are now dealing with, we refrain from drawing any conclusions in this regard and simply record, as any traveler would do, the notes taken from our diary, with the sole intention of exposing a fact that we believe to have been well observed.
Blepharitis is commonly called “sapiranga”; in the towns on the banks of the @(Rio Preto) or close to it, there is a morbid process that bears the same name, although of unusual severity, as the eyelids open into sores resulting in entropion, the disease in a large number of cases progresses to blindness.
Given the generality of gonorrhea, it is natural to assume that a large number of cases of blindness due to corneal opacification are due to this cause; syphilis, which is widely present in those parts, is also responsible for a large number of eye injuries. Asthmatic conditions known as staliciditis are very common there, especially in certain areas of Bahia and Piauí. Menstrual disorders (“desmantêlo”) are extremely common throughout the route.
In the @(village of Lago), @(district of Santana) municipality of @(Riacho da Casa Nova) (Bahia) we were given news of an epidemic disease with high mortality and which we suspect, from the description, is exanthematous typhus. The village has about 40 houses and the water shortage is extreme; this explains the enormous physical squalor in which its residents live; the PedicUlUs vestimenti NITZSCH, the common muquirana, recognized since 1909 as a transmitter of the disease according to the research of &(NICOLLE), is, according to the information, quite frequent.
As is known, the pediculid in question only frequents the skin, to look for food, after which it takes shelter in the clothes that constitute the true habitat of the egg.
Exanthematous typhus under the name of “tabardillo” is also known in several South American countries, such as @(Chile), @(Peru), @(Argentina): among us, we believe, it has never been truly identified; its absence in some places in @(Brazil) could be explained by the habit of the people of the village to wash their own clothes with some frequency and by the unfavorable climatic conditions for the development of a disease, much more common in cold regions.
The scarcity of water in certain parts of the @(northeast) prevented this use from becoming widespread. Over time, and due to the difficulty in obtaining water, bodily hygiene became the norm. Based on the information obtained, it is at least suspicious that the cases of death reported to us in the @(Lake) may be attributed to exanthematic typhus.
Infant mortality, even in large towns, is enormous; it is a very common observation that couples who had 14-16 children lost half of them at a young age;


[152]
Malaria, intestinal infections among populations that ignore any and all hygiene precepts, are the main causes of this.


Epizootics.


Anthrax is found almost everywhere in the country and all year round, causing great damage to all types of cattle and causing the death of many people, as mentioned above. According to the information, the caatinga region is the most affected. In the municipality of @(S. Raymundo Nonato) there is a disease that attacks calves mainly and whose local name is “mal da gelra”. Based on the description of the symptoms of the disease, its evolution and contagiousness, it must most likely refer to true anthrax.
In a certain area of the municipalities of Santa Rita (Bahia) and Corrente (Piauí), information regarding the presence of true and symptomatic anthrax was completely negative; the informants knew only by name, but when questioned about cases of snakebite, they stated that it was common for cattle to die as a result of snakebites. It is possible that there was some error in observation, with anthrax going unnoticed, and that the death of cattle was partly caused by bacterial anthrax. In some places in Goiás, it is common for dead deer to appear “infested” and, since foot-and-mouth disease does not exist in the area in question, it is suspected that anthrax is to some extent responsible.
We once found the body of a recently killed deer: it was certainly not foot-and-mouth disease; the blood test and the culture of this on agar were negative in any respect. Relatively close to this place, we saw a dying goat; the investigations were of no use, but anthrax could be ruled out in both cases in question. From the left bank of the @ (Tocantins) to the @ (capital of Goiás), bacterial anthrax is practically non-existent, since all the inquiries we have made lead us to believe that it is an unknown disease.
Symptomatic carbuncle is common and is known by several names: in the Caatinga region it is called “quarto tachado” and “quarto fofo”, with this name being the most common in the rest of the route; in some places in Pernambuco it is called “quarto preto”.
There is also year-round:
being more frequent between the months of
May and August, disappearing in the time of


drought. In some places in Piauí, cowboys think that the disease is caused by eating the fruits of the “arapiraca” or “triadinho”, a plant species whose name we do not know. In the headwaters of the @(Rio Preto) under the name of “laranjão” the symptomatic carbuncle is found; in the municipality of @(Duro) @(Goiás) the name changes to “mal fofo”. From the left bank of the @(Tocantins) to @(Ouro Fino) the symptomatic carbuncle does not exist or is very rare. From there to @(Anhanguera), the disease in question disappears completely. The glanders is found with greater or lesser frequency presenting variable malignancy; the disease is almost never known by that name. Sometimes it is called “caturreira” or “estiladeira” and “estilarão”. In general it is benign; in @(Perí-perí), municipality of @(S. Rita), the cutaneous form does not appear to be rare according to the information; in Goiás the most common name in the north is “estilarão”, in the south it is known as “garrotilho”, a name commonly used in the south of the country to designate bacterial anthrax.
From Bahia to Piauí, references to “mal de coroa” or “bróca” (horn disease) were relatively frequent, a disease that attacks cattle during the dry season, manifesting itself through eyelid edema, watery eyes and sometimes blindness; cows stop giving milk and the ears of affected animals are “finished”; only rarely does the disease occur “as a correction” (epizootic). In severe cases, the disease evolves in 15 days or less.


[153]
In @(Goiás we did not hear any reference to the disease in question, nor did we have the opportunity to observe any cases. In certain locations, cases of death were common; it is evidently an ill-defined disease that would require more in-depth studies.
From the city of @(Juazeiro), we heard constant references to the epizootic called “torce” which was decimating the equines; we soon suspected mal de cadeiras, whose presence had already been recorded in several parts of the country. In the town of @(Caracol) @(Piauí) we were finally able to determine exactly what the true efficient cause of the epizootic was, as we found a horse abundantly infected by Trypanosoma equinum VOGES, the agent that causes mal de cadeiras.


Several authors have incriminated capybaras as the depositaries of vinyl, but this rodent does not exist at all from Petrolina to the village of Parnaguá, the locality where it first appears and is found in great abundance; in fact, the fact is easily explained because, along the mentioned route, the scarcity of water is truly notable, which is not compatible with the capybara's way of life. Since 1902, SIVORl and LECLER have accused the transmission of the trypanosome, a hematophagous insect (Stomoxys calcitrans GEOFFROY), and in 1907, when LUTZ did research on the subject on Marajó Island, he incriminated two tabanids, Tabanus importunus WIED and T. trilineatus LATR. as the carriers of the epizootic. &(LUTZ) managed to keep alive specimens of important T., which on the 3rd day presented live trypanosomes in the intestinal content; the illustrious researcher was also the first to observe naturally infected capybaras (See LUTZ, A., Studies and observations on quebrabunda or peste de cadeiras-S. Paulo 1908). In 1911 we, in the company of &(Dr. GOMES DE FARIA), attempted in the laboratory to transmit the mal de cadeiras through S. calcitrans with negative results, due to the difficulty of keeping the dipterans in question alive in captivity. In fact, some Stomoxys that survived when examined after 48 hours did not reveal the presence of trypanosomes in fresh examination or in stained smears, which leads us to believe that these dipterans are not the natural transmitters of mal de cadeiras.
The same is true of the representatives of the Tabanidae. This obstacle has prevented us from determining exactly who the true transmitter of the epizootic is, but our observations lead us to believe that the role of transmitter of the mal de Cadeiras falls to the representatives of the genus Chrysops MEIGEN. And on the excursion that we are now reporting, we gathered very important facts for the elucidation of this question. In certain places, such as from Perí-Perí to Pinguela, the headwaters of the Rio Preto (Bahia), where its presence was again verified, a distance represented by a 10-day march, there is no mal de Cadeiras, this fact coinciding with the absence of the Chrysopinas. These tabanidae are perfectly known by the people of the country and especially in the regions traveled so much that we were able to register 4 common names: “mutuca rajada”, “mutuquinha”, “mutuca carijó”, and “mutuca maringá”, and the fact that the representatives of the genus Chrysops chase horses in numbers never reached by the species of other genera of Tabanidae and, also the circumstance that they almost only land on the heads of the animals, are conditions so evident that they cannot allow their presence to escape where they actually exist.
Since we identified the mal de Cadeiras disease, our attention was mainly directed to the tabanid fauna, since these are the insects accused of transmission; we collected them daily and therefore, we were in a position to verify the relationship between the presence of trypanosomiasis and the aforementioned Diptera. Thus, when the absence of mal de Cadeiras coincided with the non-existence of lacewings, not only due to information from the residents, but mainly due to our direct observation, we were


[154]
very inclined to suppose that chrysopines are the main transmitting agents of the disease of caesarean section; this supposition has at least the same value as those previously formulated by various authors, who incriminate Stomoxys calcitrans and several species of the genus Tabanus, since, to date, no experimental verification has been carried out except that of &(LIGNIÈRES) who found live trypanosomes in the digestive tract of S. calcitrans, refusing however to consider it as a transmitter, as he did not verify the contamination of healthy animals placed next to infected ones in a place where S. calcitrans was abundant. Cf. &(LIGNIÈRES, J.); Contribution à L'étude de la trypanosomose des équidés sud-amencains~R\.\tnos Aires 1902 pp. 101-105. In fact, experiments recently carried out in the Philippines by American experimenters with the Trypanosoma evansi, which produces the disease, lead one to believe that the reason lies with LIGNIERES. (see M.T.Z. MAIN, M.B., “The role of Stomoxys calcitrans in the transmission of Trypanosoma evansi” in the Philippine Journal of Science, Vol. VII. Sec. B. No. 6, pp. 475-520 - Manila Dec. 1912).
&(A. MACHADO), the discoverer of Profosan, a specific safe agent against the disease of chairs, at the end of 1914 verified in @(Mato-Grosso) the transmitter of the disease chairs, by the presence of trypanosomes in the intestinal content of Tabanus importunas'WXCD. This species was the most researched by the aforementioned observer who found a percentage of 0.5 0% of infected specimens.
The examination carried out on the chrysopines resulted negative, however, according to his information, the research he carried out on these Tabanidae was smaller in number than that carried out with T. importunas, because this was the most abundant species, at that time, in the regions where he roamed.
In the previously given list of Diptera found in the regions we visited, T. importunas is recorded, which, although present everywhere, as is the case throughout Brazil, was never found in abundance.
As we have already recorded in the chapter concerning Diptera, Stomoxys calcitrans practically did not exist at the time of our excursion, however, the disease of chairs was decimating and we had a plentiful harvest of chrysopines.
Another fact worthy of note is the absence, according to information obtained in @(Parnaguá), where capybaras are very numerous, of the mortality of these rodents, which are also victims of T. equinum according to verifications carried out among us by &(LUTZ) and &(CHAGAS) and in @(Paraguay) by &(ELMASSIAN) and &(MIGONE).
In @(Piauí) the invasion of the mal de cadeiras is recent, dating back less than a decade; farmers are unanimous in affirming that the trypanosomiasis came from the banks of the @(S. Francisco); in the surroundings of the village of @(Parnaguá) the invasion of the torce dates back only 3-4 years. In @(Goiás) the disease dates back 30 years, probably imported from @(Mato Grosso) and, as the north of @(Goiás) is supplied by @(Barreiras) @(Bahia) the mal de cadeiras was taken there by the troops from Goiás; @(Barreiras) is bathed by the river of the same name and a tributary of the @(S. Francisco) and gradually invaded the riverside towns of @(Bahia) and @(Pernambuco) until it invaded the south of @(Piauí). The course of the epizootic was in all probability this, since communications between @(Goiás) and @(Pará) where the disease is also known, are only made by water; the same does not happen with @(Mato Grosso) which maintains communication with the south of @(Goiás) and where the disease of chairs was already known since the time of the war of @(Paraguay).
The name “torce” or “troço”, a corruption of the first and used by the most ignorant people, disappears in @(Goiás) to be replaced by “escancho”, a name reserved in other states exclusively for durina, but which in the Goiás regions in general includes both trypanosomoses. As we approached the south, we began to verify the replacement of this name by “peste de seca” and “cochila”, a name that at first we assumed referred to a different morbid entity but which we finally inclined to use.


[155]
to believe it is another synonym to add to the evil of chairs or "chair plague", as it is known in the southernmost regions of @(Goiás). In the States of @(Pernambuco) and @(Bahia), where goat farming is intense, residents complain of the "thinness" epizootic that causes great damage to that cattle.
We have never been able to observe an animal being attacked and hernatological investigations have always been negative; however, based on the description and course of the disease and the known receptivity of goats to Trypanosoma equinum, we suspect that it is also a case of the disease of chairs; in fact, many residents report that the animals in question are subject to the epizootic; some try to differentiate the "thinness" from the disease of chairs. These are probably different clinical aspects of the same disease, which, when it does not progress quickly, causes great weight loss, hence the name "drying plague". In some locations in Bahia and Goiás, we were told that pigs are also attacked and in @(Brejinhos) @(Goias) the "drying plague" also attacks the docks. This fact is in agreement with the observations made by &(MlGONE) in @(Paraguay) when he observed these animals attacked by T. cqninam. Horses and donkeys are the most attacked, donkeys are only rarely attacked.
Another equine trypanosomiasis present throughout the route is durina, an epizootic caused by Trypanosoma equiperdum DOFLEIN and generally known in the regions of Bahia and Pernambuco and throughout the south of Piauí by the name of "escancho”; from @(Formosa) (Municipality of @(Santa Rita do Rio Preto) @(Bahia) onwards, the common name of the disease becomes, in addition to "escancho” "mal de foveiro”, as the inhabitants believe that they are different diseases when they are merely aspects of the same disease.
The "mal de foveiro" is named after the spots that appear on various parts of the body: legs, breasts, "paridod* (vulva) and corresponds exactly to what in Ceará is called "mold". From the Bahian generals onwards, people begin to confuse the same name as "escancho", the mal de cadeiras and the durína; throughout Goiás where this designation exists, it generally refers to the mal de cadeiras: however, in some localities in the north of the State, the disease is called by the name "foveiro" or "mal de pinta".
Diarrhea in calves is common and deadly everywhere; the disease also attacks goats. The names vary greatly, the best known being “reira”; “curso” “enxurrío” “câimbra” “toque” are used in various localities. EJ molesda do “verde”, with mortality being highest between the months of January and March.
Among the diseases that attack equines is the sponge, whose pathogenesis is still dubious, with some assuming that it is a worm.
Dr. GOMES DE FARIA believes that the disease is of fungal origin, since research he undertook on this subject at the Institute led him to this supposition. The same author was the first to employ emetic treatment, which has an undoubted effect against the disease, which until then was believed to be indestructible and which has spread throughout the country. In mid-1915, Dr. A. MOSES announced the discovery of a cure for sponges by intravenous application of sodium iodide, claiming to have cured several animals that had been attacked without recurrence. In fact, the medication recommended by &(GOMES DE FARIA) and &(THOMAS POMPEU) and which gave such good results in @(Ceará), in @(Rio de Janeiro) failed, as the applications carried out by &(MUNIZ DE ARAGAO) on army horses and by &(VlANNA) on animals from Manguinhos, resulted negative.
Osteoporosis, or swollen face, a disease that causes great harm to equines of all nations, and whose pathogenesis and treatment remain unknown, has also been found to be present in several locations. Through observations, cowboys are fully aware of the disease and immediately establish the differential diagnosis with "forgotten moult", a category that encompasses several conditions that attack the upper jaws of equines.


[156]
always ending in abcedation. At the end of December 1914, Dr. PARREIRAS HORTA, in an article published in the “Jornal do Commercio”, announced that he had isolated the germ that causes osteoporosis, which was named Micrococcus osfeoporosus. From @(Juazeiro) to the beginning of the Gerais, references to rabies are very common: inquiring about the existence of dogs in the region is useless; the qualifier is completely unknown, being replaced by the name “spirited dogs”; “to spirit” means exactly to harm, to acquire rabies. Knowing this, anyone who asks questions about it will be impressed.
due to the abundance of information about the widespread presence of rabies and related diseases. Human deaths are frequently cited, although in proportions lower than what might be supposed based on the number of infected dogs and other animals; as the therapeutic resources employed in those regions are completely absurd and the number of people bitten by apparently rabid dogs and animals is very high, according to the information, it is legitimate to assume that, mixed with rabies, there are other apparently similar illnesses, since the only treatment currently known continues to be that instituted by &(PASTEUR) and the extraordinary loyalty of rabies is well known when not properly treated.
From time to time, large outbreaks of rabies occur, as happened in 1911 in @(S. Bento) @(municipality of S. Raymundo Nonato), affecting hundreds of animals of all breeds; oxen, horses and horses were the most affected and a dog bit two people who did not die. In addition, some farmers told us about the fact that an individual had been bitten by a rabid donkey, without consequences.
Since it was easy to observe the individual in question, we sought him out in order to obtain information directly. The case involved the owner of a tame donkey, which they call “raçoeiro” (a type of donkey) because it came to look for food at its owner’s home; the animal became ill almost unexpectedly; the symptoms worsened rapidly, to the point that there was no doubt about the diagnosis of rabies, which was then rampant in the municipality; while trying to get the animal away from the vicinity of the home, it was bitten on the leg.
When we passed by, the scar was just over a year old, and we can clearly judge the great extent and depth of the wound caused by the bite. The donkey, which was held and tied, lived for about 24 hours. Unless the case in question constitutes, along with a few others, an exception as regards the incubation of the disease, it is yet another case to add to the others that have not shown any signs of the disease, despite the absence of rational treatment. Now, throughout the area, farmers complain of “scabies”; do not imagine that it is an ectoparasite (Sarcoptes), which is called lice there; “scabies” that attacks cattle and horses, especially the latter, occurs epizootically. The inhabitants think that it is caused by the ingestion of a plant, which they call “weed.” In fact, from personal observations, the plant in question varies according to the location, but they often point to a small plant from the Compositae family as the culprit.
The disease begins with increasingly intense itching; the affected animal begins to rub itself against trees, fences, walls, etc. until, finally, it begins to tear itself apart with its teeth. In the south of the country, under the name of scratching plague, there is an animal disease with the same symptoms and which since 1912 CARINI and MACIEL identified with the disease that in 1902 under the title: “Ueber einr neue Infektionkrankeit “Centralbl. f. BakL 1, Abt. Oring. Bd. 32 No. 5 pp. 353-357, was studied by AUJESKY, who was the first to investigate and which, for this reason, today bears his name. In 1911 ZWICK and ZELLER published in “Arbeiten aus dem Ksl. Gesundheitsamte, Voi. 36pp. 332-403


[157]
under the heading “Untersuchungen ueber die sogenannte Pseit dowuty\ the best existing work on pseudo-rabies, infectious bulbar paralysis, names that still have the itching plague. Nothing is known yet about the germ and, the works on the subject, are still scarce and the disease is still very poorly known because until today, it has only been reported in @(Hungary), @(Siberia) and @(Brazil); any contribution to the subject is of interest and that is why we insist on the issue. Given the analogy of symptoms with the disease identified in @(S. Paulo) by &(CARINI) and &(MACIEL) as being the same that occurs in countries far from ours, it is to be presumed that the “scabies” existing in the Brazilian northeast is AUJESZKY's disease, taking that name when it attacks equids and bovines, and being called rabies, which it closely resembles when it attacks dogs. However, we would like to draw attention to one fact; the virus studied by &(CARINI) and &(MACIEL) when inoculated subcutaneously in dogs and cats, does not reproduce the disease and this observation is in disagreement with the research of several authors among which are those of &(ZWICK) and &(ZELLER PANISSET) and &(SCHMIEDHOFFER) (See, “Beitraege zur Pathologie der infektioesen Bulbaerparalyse fAUJESZKYsc/rtvz. Kfankheit), Zcits. f.
Infekt. Krank. u. Hyg.. Vol. 8, pp. 333-405 1910 etc. However, by ingestion, those authors can easily reproduce the disease; leaving aside the fact that the virus studied by &(CARINI) and &(MACIEL), in view of this disagreement, is the same one studied by European researchers, it is still striking the large number of people bitten by dogs, apparently rabid, and by other animals, such as the case of the donkey already mentioned and where contamination does not occur; without the slightest doubt, the analogies of the virus from the northeast present flagrant agreements with the virus of the scratching plague, studied in @(S. Paulo). Some animals will contract the disease only by ingestion, and it is very likely that the rabies outbreaks observed there are attributable to pseudo-rabies, although rabies may exist concomitantly. It is a very widespread belief that "scabies" attacks mainly white or spotted animals of this color; we do not know if this actually occurs. Several informants have told us that during the dry season, when dogs are "spirited", it is very common for dead foxes to appear, probably from the same disease, as well as deer and pigs. Pseudo-rabies has been studied in several animals and (SCHMIEDHOFFER), in loc. cif., refers to spontaneous cases observed by him in horses and donkeys, which makes it more likely that we identified the disease attacking donkeys - an observation not previously recorded - and horses, which, until now, had not been observed in Brazil attacked by the disease.
In @(Formosa), municipality of @(Sta. Rita) do @(Rio Preto), we were told that more than 10 years ago there was a major rabies epidemic with several human victims, and the spread of the disease to livestock was observed. The mortality among dogs suffering from "runner's disease" was enormous and, according to the narratives, this was the focus where true rabies must have existed, at least on a larger scale, since the number of human victims was much higher than what would normally occur in similar cases recorded there as rabies, but where, in all probability, another related disease occurred concomitantly, which we believe to be, for the reasons set out above, pseudo-rabies. In March of this year, &(RÂTZ) v. S. published in “Zeits.f. Infekt. Krank. u. Hyg. Vol. 15, fac. 2 pp. 99-106 under the heading "Empfacnplichkeit der Tiere fuer Paralysis bulbaris infectiosa", a general overview of what is known on the subject and which corroborates our point of view on the matter.


&(PANISSET, L.) published in the Pevue gàterale of Mcd. veterinaire,^. XXIII—No 275 pp. 601-618. @(Toulouse) —June 1914, under the title: “Paralysis bulbaire infectieuse, pseudo-rage, maladie d'Aujeszki” excellent article where he reviews all the research done previously, adding new observations. Among the species attacked by the disease the author mentions the European fox and this fact increases the probability that the


[158]
the mortality of foxes in the northeast to which we referred above, is caused by pseudo-rabies. When studying the evolution of the disease in horses, &(PANISSET) says that the virus seems to lose in the organism of that animal all its pathogenic action for animals of other species, since inoculations carried out with products from horses that succumbed to the disease always result in negative results. If we admit, given the affinities that exist between horses and donkeys, that pseudo-rabies evolves in this animal in a manner similar to that observed in horses, which is very likely, this would explain the fact that the individual bitten by the donkey did not become infected. In fact, humans are very little sensitive to the virus, and to date there have been only a few observations (See &(RÁTZ), loco at.
Foot-and-mouth disease was only found in the south of @(Goiás) where it is called “nail pest”; despite frequent inquiries, the disease does not seem to exist in the other areas visited. In the caatinga region of Bahia, we were told of a disease that, in winter, only attacks goats, affecting their hooves, which consequently fall off; we believe that it is not foot-and-mouth disease, not only because it lacks other characteristics, but also because it spares other animals that are sensitive to the disease. It is likely that this is a disease already observed among us in sheep under the name of “chilblain” and has long been known in @(Europe) and @(United States) under the names of “Fussraiideder Sdiafé” in @(Germany), “Footrot of sheep” in @(United States), “contagious footrot” in England and “Piétin contagicux” in @(France). The disease begins with the inflammation of the crown of the hoof, which finally falls off as a result of the purulent secretion of an unpleasant smell that
form and that invades the entire inner surface of the hooves. The affected animal is unable to walk; at first it walks on its knees, but eventually it becomes completely paralyzed and ends up dying. Despite numerous blood tests, we have never been able to observe the parasite that causes tristeza in cattle; however, from time to time, information has appeared that somehow agrees with the main clinical symptoms of babesiosis; to give them credit, the area where it is most observed is the municipality of @(S. Raymundo Nonato), and according to informants, there has been a periodic appearance of intense epizootics, with high mortality, although the absence of hemoglobinuria is constant. The equids examined have also never shown to be suffering from nuttalliosis, a disease caused by a hematozoan similar to that of the genus Babesia, and an efficient cause of tristeza in cattle.
In the place called @(Vau), municipality of @(Sta. Rita) @(Bahia) we heard for the first time a reference to a very common disease in @(Goias) and called ''caruaru”. It attacks only "minjólos calves", that is, very young animals, characterized by swelling of the joints, which almost always abscess; it is quite fatal and slow to develop; more common in rainy weather and generally attacks the joint of the right front leg and the other of the left hind leg or vice versa; if the animal escapes, the attacked parts atrophy; the first symptom to be noticed is weight loss and consequent swelling of the joints. From the symptoms, course of the disease and pathogenicity for very young calves, it is most likely the case of the German “Laehme der Saeitglinge” or “Pyosepticaemia neonatoruni”, a disease whose pathogenic agent is still not known to science. It is a disease that attacks several mammals in the first 4 weeks of life; it is assumed that the virus enters through the navel, since the disease is always a consequence of an umbilical infection. The infection has great similarities with diarrhea in calves. &(HUTYRA) and &(MAREK) in the 3rd edition of the volume, 1910, pp. t 160-172 of their work “Spezielle Pathologie und Therapie der Haustiere” treat the subject as an entirely separate morbid entity.


[159]
In the northern region of Goiás, osteomalacia is very common in young donkeys, which consequently develop bowed legs in a truly remarkable way. We were told that, although very rarely, the same phenomenon is observed in horses, oxen and goats. They attribute the fact to the pastures and that, when they observe the disease at the beginning, they are able to stop it by transporting the affected animals to other places. No. 12 of the “Mr. Zance Bulletin of the Department of Agriculture, New South. Males”, published in October 1914, is entirely devoted to the study of osteomalacia in Australian cattle, the works being signed by &(FB GUTHRIE), &(AA RAMSAY) and &(HJ JENSEN), and &(MAX HENRY), and the question is studied from various aspects. The research carried out led to the conclusion that the soil of pastures where the disease commonly occurs is poorer in nitrogen, lime, potash and phosphoric acid than other pastures. Forage plants suffer from the poor soil and prophylactic and therapeutic measures are subordinated to the absence of these substances. The observation of farmers in the north of Goiás is therefore true because, in all probability, analogous, if not identical, causes are those that give rise to osteomalacia in that region of Goiás. In Água Branca, a municipality in Porto Nacional, Goiás, we were informed of the relatively frequent existence of “empolo” or “gerimum”, a tumor that grows on the back above the front of the horses' hooves and that slowly ends up preventing locomotion.
Swine fever is common, especially in the south of Goiás, where these animals are raised on a much larger scale than in the regions previously visited. Of the clinical forms of the disease, the people only know the pneumonic form, which they call “batedeira”. It is believed to be caused by a filterable germ, but recent research by &(KING) and &(HOFFMANN) (Spirochaeta suis, its significance as a pathogenic organism. Studies or Hog Cholera The Journal. of infectious diseases, Vol. 13, No. 3 pp. 463-498 Nov. 1913), shed great light on the question, since these authors demonstrated that the disease was caused by Spirochaeta suis, which, having filterable forms, allowed the assumption of pathogenesis caused by ultra-microscopic microorganisms. In Vol. 16 No. 1 pp. 54-57 January 1915 of the same magazine &(KING, EW) & &(DRAKE, HR) publicize the results obtained with the culture of spirochetes made in Hata's medium, with rabbit kidney and the seeding of the Berkefeld filtrate of material coming from a lesion inflicted on the ear of a pig and whose examination, in the ultra-microscope revealed, numerous spirochetes. The inoculation in 3 animals, reproduced the disease being verified in all the presence of spirochetes.
The people of those regions call Cysticercus ccllulosus, the larval stage of Taenia solium L., in its intermediate host, the pig, under the name “canjica”. Cysticercosis is relatively abundant, and infected meat is only repelled when it is very infested.
Poultry farming is small, which is due to the prejudice against the use of poultry meat, which is generally considered harmful and therefore not included in the diet of certain diseases, especially malaria. In @(Caracol) there is a well-developed peacock breeding and the “cocar” (guinea fowl) is almost as abundant as the chicken everywhere. Although we did not find or obtain positive information about the presence of Argas persicus (OKEN), we believe that it is present at least as far as @(Parnaguá) because, on several occasions, we heard references to diseases decimating chickens and ducks and that, from the description, it must be attributed to Treponema auserina (SACHA ROFF) (Spirochefa gallinarum of the authors) germ transmitted by that ixodida.
Estrous myiasis, which causes so much damage to cattle in the southern areas of the country, only occurs sporadically in dry regions. The entire long stretch between @(Juazeiro) and the limits of @(Goiás), only in a location called @(Jatobá) and belonging to the municipality of @(Remanso) @(Bahia),


[160]
the presence of Dermatobia hominis (LINNAEUS JUN., 1781) ( = D. cyaniventris MACQT.) was verified. In a work published some years ago we had already predicted that this would happen, since the fly that produces the botfly requires humidity conditions that are not found in the areas mentioned. No one has yet calculated the damage caused to cow hides by the parasite in question, but it is enough to note that the depreciation produced in leather exported from @(Brazil) is so great that, for the fact &(ZUERN) since 1877, draws attention to leathers coming from @(Brazil) and calling, Riohäute all skins coming from @(Brazil) or not, and which are devalued by the perforations produced by the larvae of Dermatobia.
The absence of this dipteran in the regions of Bahia and Pernambuco allows for a complete increase in the value of goat skins, the main export element of several municipalities in those states; in addition, since Dermatobia, in addition to parasitizing a large number of mammals, also attacks humans, this myiasis ceases to be part of the nosological picture of the area. However, as we entered the plains between @(S. Marcelo) @(Bahia) and @(Vila de Duro) in @(Goiás), we began to notice that the botfly was occurring more frequently; it is, however, in the state of @(Goiás), mainly in the southern zone, that the myiasis assumes the proportions of a scourge; only in the zone between @(Baião) and @(Porto Nacional) was a certain decrease noted, but as we approached the forested zone in the south of the state, we began to observe the depredations caused to the cattle by the parasite.
To this day, the manner in which flies lay their eggs on their hosts remains unknown; SURCOUF recently communicated to the French Academy of Sciences the results observed by GONZALEZ-RINCONES of Venezuela on the role played by a mosquito (Janthinosoma lutzi) as a carrier of Dermatobia eggs. Our observations on the biology of this mosquito and also on the botfly are entirely contrary to what was reported by those authors.
We must confess, however, that the evidence in favor of this theory is accumulating. The first to report the fact was Rafael Morales of Guatemala in December 1911, who in 1913 managed to create the larva on the arm of one of his employees. Knab, in Vol. XVIII, No. 3 pp. 179-183 of the Proc. oj the Ent. Soc. of Washington, Sept. 1916, published an interesting work on the subject under the title “Egg— Disposal In Dennatobia hominis.”
We are much more inclined to accept the popular observation, already recorded by us in @(São Paulo) and northwest of @(Mato Grosso), about the direct penetration of the larva into the host's body. Although we generally disregard popular observations because they are usually poorly made, we were not left impressed by the agreement that we found to exist between the observations of the people of those States, with those reported by several people, in the places @(Taboão) near the capital of @(Goiás) and by farmers in the vicinity of @(Anhanguera), places where the botfly reaches proportions that we have never verified.
People from the aforementioned places say that the fly lays its eggs directly under people and clothes or on clothes placed on plants, especially if these are impregnated with sweat, which attracts them a lot. In fact, this fact is already recorded by scientific observations concerning hematophagous insects.
If this is indeed the case, the explanation for cases of newborns becoming infected within homes from which they have never left is confirmed, since the eggs are carried by contaminated clothing; in these cases too, there is an argument in favor of the eggs being transported by mosquitoes that invade the home. Furthermore, the description given by the inhabitants of areas where the botfly is abundant, of the small larvae that they say are torn off when they penetrate the skin, speaks in favor of what they claim.


[161]
In the south of Goiás, we saw a mixture of powder and lard being applied to the body parts of cattle infested with botflies, which forced the larvae to abandon their hiding places, causing them to fall to the ground. This method of treatment is perfectly rational and practical, as it prevents access to air and obstructs the stigmatic plates, thus suffocating the larvae.
As in many other parts of Brazil, we have found that the local people incriminate a dipteran belonging to the genus Echinomyia as the responsible producer of botflies. The origin of this belief lies in the observation that several species of that genus lay their larvae on the leaves of trees, where they look for their hosts, usually lepidopteran larvae. Verification of this fact has contributed to the fact that, even in scientific books, we find the statement that Dermatobia lays its larvae on the leaves, where humans and animals become infected through contact.
In @(Goiás) we learned that the tapirs themselves “embernate”, with the jaguars being very persecuted, a fact already recorded by several observers and which greatly contributes to the devaluation of their skins.
An observation that we recorded in the south of @(Goias) and that caused us surprise, was the large size of a botfly removed from a 20-day-old calf according to the information; if true, this would indicate that Dcnnatohia develops much more quickly in cattle, contrary to what happens with man and animals where the evolution takes several months.


Folk therapy


This chapter will show the lack of resources in which the populations of @(Central Brazil) live, forced to seek help from the local flora and fauna in order to treat themselves. From the presentation below, one will see the poverty of the therapeutic arsenal that they can resort to, in fact, almost always without the slightest result. Products from the flora are used, depending on the location, to overcome illnesses of completely different natures and this is already proof of their little or no value as a medicinal means.
We have the impression that the therapeutic action of our plants is immensely exaggerated throughout Brazil; this statement does not exclude the true fact that many plant species do indeed have effective therapeutic action; however, anyone who examines the works of Brazilian botanists will not escape the enormous number of plants indicated as first-rate therapeutic elements for a large number of illnesses.
Apart from the works of &(PECKOLT) and articles by &(MONTEIRO DA SILVA) and some medical theses, there is almost no original research on the subject, with the works being limited to highlighting the therapeutic virtues that people attribute to them.
The products extracted from fauna are much smaller in number and do not have as much credibility; prayers, superstitions and abuses are very popular due to the prestige that the marvelous gives them. The “evil eye” still has all its mysterious power throughout Central Brazil, and there are individuals who have such a pernicious reputation that “even speaking about it offends”. They are jettatore, whose presence or speech is enough to annihilate the best local therapy to the detriment of the sick person, whose death is attributed to them.
Snakebites are especially influenced by the individuals in question, and this gives ample room for quackery to explain the disasters by attributing them to someone's malevolent influence. The belief in the supernatural power that some people claim to possess is truly astonishing. In @(Parnaguá) we had the opportunity to meet an individual who, many leagues away, was said to possess fantastic powers in curing snakebites. Any person bitten, even seriously, would recover if the individual in question had time to place his hands on the body or even an object belonging to the victim, and this, from any distance. To contest this fact, demonstrating its impossibility, would be


[162]
useless work for anyone who wants to try; even the most cultured people in the area give it complete credit; the healer himself, with whom we spoke, solemnly narrated to us a long series of cures, ending by saying that he was unaware of the reason for his power
The people do not know snakes, and they are terrified of them. Except for the rattlesnake, which is well-known for its rattle, any dark snake that comes across them is immediately judged as poisonous; for them, snakes fly, and the caninana is always cited as an example. Despite the anatomical impossibility of preventing it, some snakes have the ability to suckle cows and even women while they sleep. Among the saurians there is the genus Amphisbaena (two-headed snake), whose representatives are absolutely harmless but, for the people, are the most poisonous snakes. There are errors, but they are excusable, such as the fact that the rattlesnake swallows its young when it sees itself being chased; since this snake is ovoviviparous, when a specimen is killed on the verge of giving birth, they interpret it as having been swallowed. Such complete ignorance in this regard explains the success of any treatment, since for the people any bite is caused by a poisonous snake.
The following medicines are applied to the bitten individual, some such as high doses of alcohol, used throughout the country, and others already used locally, such as garlic, a first-class medication in those parts and used to combat various illnesses; salt, gunpowder and kerosene are also used internally and externally. Other localities apply red-hot iron and also rozalgar (arsenic bisulphide) internally and externally. The most
cultures use potassium permanganate.
The “golda” (infusion) of fragrant umburana is also applied, as well as the shavings of the trunk of the wild pine nut.
In other places, they use the shavings of a tree called “coronha”. Serum therapy is completely unknown outside the cities along the route; the number of human deaths is high according to the information; the damage to livestock is also great. In addition to the snakes that Butantan prepares the serum from, there are certainly other poisonous snakes already recorded in science and probably some still unknown, which must be studied and captured in order to begin preparing serum, the only effective medication against bites. The bitten individual, while being treated, does not receive visitors and only comes into contact with family members, in order to avoid the influence of someone with evil powers. Pregnant women are especially frowned upon in these cases. Garlic, salt and alcohol are also used in cases of rabies; however, nothing is more effective for this disease than placing the key to the tabernacle of the nearest church in the patient's mouth; even urine is used as a medication for rabies. As a prophylactic, dogs are usually given milk with calomel; Locally, they use burnt deer antler powder and in some places they use the infusion of the root of an apocynaceae plant called “4 patacas” (AUamanda violacea GARDN and FIELD), which is also used as an antirheumatic. The vesicular hyoid bones of howler monkeys are used as drinking glasses in some places, since the water drunk from these containers has therapeutic virtues focused on
the goiter. These animals also seek to feed on the trachea and throat muscles for the same purpose.
Malaria has a more varied therapeutic arsenal, from the purging resin (Opercuna convolvulus SILVA MANSO), the infusion of the bark of the joazeiro (Ziziphus joazeiro MART.), the pao pereira Geissospernium vellosii FR. ALL. They also include “golda” - the infusion of the flower of the “catinga de porco” or “pau de rato” and “catingueira”, as it is also called in other places (Caesalpinia bracteosa TUL.) the flower and root of the “-Alaria mollé” or “canafistula” (Cassiaferruginea SCHRAD.) and the fedegoso (Cassia various species) the root of (under this name they confuse two phytolaccacaeas: Seguieria floribunda BENTH.


[163]
and Petiveria tetrandra FISCl I.) and the roasted feathers of the guinea fowl. We have already mentioned the limited use of quinine elsewhere. The mandacarus (Cereus) and the friar's head (Echinocereus) are used in certain eruptions. The juazeiro is one of the most widely used plant species in folk therapy in the northeast; the leaves, fruits and certain parts of the wood, the "entrecasco", as they are called there, are widely used as a breastplate, healing agent, parasiticide, etc.
In 1909, Dr. JE FREIRE DE CARVALHO JÚNIOR published in Bahia, under the title “Study of Ziziphus joazeiro in its applications in Medicine”, the original and interesting thesis in which the author reports having obtained a new glycoside which he named joazina, then dealing with its medical applications, having verified a certain effectiveness in the treatment of ulcers.
The bark of the umburana tree (Torresia cearensis FREIRE ALL) is used in baths and for menstrual disorders that are very common throughout the area. Wounds are treated with the resin of the “red umburana” or the “bee” Bursera leptophloeos WK, which are used as sedatives; animal wounds are treated with the “golda” of the “imbira-assú” Bômbax L.); the infusion of the bark of the trunk of the faveleira tree (Pachystroma acanthophylla LOEFGR.) is used for internal hemorrhages resulting from injuries. Diphtheria is treated with lemon; against pneumonia, known locally as “pleurisy”, the left canine tooth of the peccary (Dycoteles labiatus CXyV.) is used, which, after being “roasted**, is drunk in alcohol; in Bahian areas, they usually drink the blood of the guinea fowl immediately after it has been bled. Conjunctivitis is treated barbarously with pipe tar in general, and in some places,
added with iron filings and lemon. The joazeiro still finds application in hemorrhoids and runny nose, the quince tree (Crotou), anjico (Piptadenia monilijbrniis BENTH.), aroeira (Astroniuni) and “Catinga de porco*' are commonly used as balsamics.
As an anthelmintic, they use mastruço (Chemopodium ambrosioides L); this medication is in fact effective. Myiasis is also treated rationally, using calomel and creolin. However, the use of this, as the farms move away from the towns, decreases due to the high price it attracts, but as soon as the animal escapes, they use prayers; they follow the trail of the attacked herbivore and as soon as it is found, they form, with two green leaves inserted one inside the other, a cross that is placed over the animal's footprint and covered with the soil collected from the same trail, and then prayed over; they also use the "golda" of the bark of the jurema (Mimosae) in order to overcome the screwworms. Symptomatic carbuncle is treated by castrating the calves and making a cross, made with red-hot iron, on the hip. In some places, calomel is usually used as a prophylactic measure, which is introduced under the skin; in other places, the affected calves are bled; against the disease of chairs, calomel is also used under the skin and the animal is bled.
These observations only cover the states of Piauí, Pernambuco and Bahia. In Goiás, where the flora has other elements, the plants that provide medicine are completely diverse. Everywhere, a euphorbiaceae called “paulista” (Joannesia princeps VELL.), the emetic tartar and the purging pine nut (Jatropha curcas L.) are widely used in humans and animals. In places where there are doctors, they are consulted as a last resort; first they resort to prayers and the medications in use; in certain places in Piauí, the women of the people, when they give birth, usually ingest a drink that contains pepper; the scissors that were used to cut the umbilical cord are placed under the child's head to prevent the illness lasting seven days.
Caapeba (Heckeriapeltata L.> as well as Solanum paniculatum L. (Jurubeba) are used in various ways to combat liver diseases, various fevers and even syphilis;


[164]
a capparidaceous the "mussambê" (Clcomc spinosa L.) and the "lôco" (Phimbago scandens Ly already with this name known from the time of &(PISO) and &(MARCGRAV) only not having so many applications, are used as synapisants. The water contained in the stem of the mucunans (Mucuna ADANS) and the root of the imbuzeiro (Spondias tiiberosa AR. CÂMARA), are used in the treatment of diarrhea.
As in all parts of Brazil, it is believed that local fruits are the cause of the illnesses, so the inhabitants mainly deprive themselves of pine cones, araças and watermelons. Among the amulets there is the alligator tooth which is placed in plain sight on the leather hat, in order to protect the sufferer from certain illnesses. The oil extracted from the fat of the capybara was used in Parnaguá to cure tuberculosis. In that locality, the aforementioned rodent is very abundant, and the local pharmacist would buy a bottle of oil for 2§. In Goiás, the cervical lymph nodes of the tapir are widely used in rheumatic affections.


General considerations.


Even in the green, which expresses the abundance of those places, the diet of the majority of the population is insufficient and poor. In the caatinga region, the basis is made up of goat meat, flour and brown sugar: in @(Piauí) and certain areas of @(Goiás), charque is made with beef from cattle. On cattle farms, milk is used in various ways and in abundance. Fresh meat and milk are excellent in @(Piauí); at certain times of the year, however, the cattle like to feed on a plant that impregnates the meat and milk with an almost intolerable garlic flavor. During the days that we were staying at the @(Tanque) farm, it was impossible to obtain milk with any other flavor and more than once, even well-cooked meat did nothing to mask the strong garlic flavor that it contained. The cause of this fact lies in the ingestion by the cattle of a climbing Bignoniacea commonly known there by the name of “vine of garlic” and which is probably Adenocalyiama alliaceum MIERS.


As a matter of curiosity, we transcribe the menu of a cowboy from the vicinity of @(Joazeiro), who personally gave us the information: At 6 o'clock, simple coffee; at 10 o'clock, lunch of sun-dried meat (beef or goat meat prepared in the style of jerky), flour and sometimes beans; at 1 p.m., dinner consisting of the same food as lunch, but with more brown sugar and cream cheese for dessert; at 7 p.m., supper; coffee usually accompanied by cream cheese or meat. This is the food of the wealthy, outside the cities and towns, because the cowboy
participates in all the benefits of farmers.
Much less than this constitutes the diet of the poor inhabitants of the #backlands of the northeast; their frugality is inevitable; where, however, poverty assumes painful proportions, it is in the regions of Bahia and Piauí near @(Goiás) and mainly in the north of this state, where a large number of Brazilians live at God's will, looking for honey and eating what they hunt without salt, cooked simply in water and accompanied by rice, when there is, flour and some coconuts when it is in season. Salt is not used at all by a large number of inhabitants of these regions and it can be assumed that this is the case, given the high price it reaches in these parts, where, when it exists, it is sold for $2,000 and more per liter.
This is only observed in isolated and scattered dwellings in the “Gerais”, but the number of these is certainly in the thousands; in general, in the distant places to which we are now referring, what exists is a grouping of a few houses, at a greater or lesser distance from one that serves as a center; the whole is almost always named after the most important resident; it is not really a farm, but rather a handful of people who help each other. There, food is more abundant, there is corn, rice, beans, brown sugar and small livestock (chickens, pigs, etc.). For the traveler, these places often represent salvation, there is no exaggeration; they are the only places where they can stock up on food and the corn essential for the troops.






[165]
Even so, salt is used sparingly: it is only used in the necessary quantity to prevent the meat from rotting during the charring process. Coffee is not used because the price is prohibitive, and it is sold in grains for $2 per kilo near Porto Nacional. We do not believe there is any need to dwell on this chapter any further; we still have vivid, very sad impressions of the profound misery and abandonment in which thousands of human beings lie, and our testimony would in no way alleviate their suffering.
How can one feed oneself properly if the salary is negligible? In @(Joazeiro) and surrounding areas, the salary is daily for 12 hours of work without rest; 30 kilometers from @(Petrolina) it is R$500.00, and for the same amount of work the food is paid by the boss, dropping to R$300 and R$200.00 in several locations in Bahia and Pernambuco. From @(Piauí) onwards, contracts begin that are still present in the capital of @(Goiás) itself, according to unsuspected information. In @(Vila do Duro) and surrounding areas, a monthly fee of R$7.00 per worker is paid; the work is 8 to 10 hours; the food is provided by the boss, and rest is required on Sundays and holy days; in the vicinity of the cities the monthly fee improves; near @(Capital of Goiás) it can reach 20$000. A kilo of fresh meat in @(Vila do Duro) costs 250 rs., a litre of salt 1$, a can of kerosene 15-208 and, by the way, it is worth noting that @(Duro) is easily refuelled in @(Barreiras) - @(Bahia), from where it is about 8 days of common travel. 50 kilometres from the city of @(Porto Nacional), salt is already sold at 18,500 per litre, kerosene at 1$000 per bottle; creolin 100 grams for 1$; in @(Veríssimo) kerosene goes up in price, salt reaches 2$ per litre and this price remains until approximately 160 kilometres from @(Capital of Goiás), when it starts to fall.


The high price of oil explains the lighting used in @(Central Brazil); the use of oil lamps is widespread, some are made of iron and bought in large cities, but most are made of clay, roughly shaped, with only the necessary hollow to contain the fat of any animal or beeswax, carnauba, castor oil, which feeds the wick. Far from the cities and towns, this is what is used; and in the central part of @(Goiás), there is no other means of lighting.
The high cost of certain products only has the advantage of not allowing the development of alcoholism; the inhabitants far from the larger towns are forced teetotalers; the bottle of brandy reaches 28 and above.
To compensate for the absence of alcoholism, there is smoking, which exists in incredible proportions; women generally smoke pipes, chew and take snuff; children chew in secret, but use snuff given by their parents.
The use of chewing tobacco generally begins at the age of 12 and often it is the parents themselves who introduce their children to it in order to avoid geofajia, an indication of hookworm infection. Smoking is much more common among women, and it is very common for women to chew and puff on sticks and smoke more than one stick per week. We weighed a stick of tobacco and found it to weigh 750 grams. The “chewer” does not give up the “chew” or “brejeira” even to eat and many sleep with the smoke in their mouths; however, smoking is still expensive, since a stick costs between $3 and $4.
Before arriving at @(Juazeiro) the traveler has a clear impression of the scarcity of water in the region he is passing through, due to the distribution of water made by the train to the residents of certain stations. From @(Itumerim) onwards the service begins; the liquid is transported in a tanker wagon that holds 10 cubic meters and where the residents come to fill their containers; to speed up the operation, some individuals climb up to the water tank and from there dump the liquid, which, to a large extent, spills onto the ground, causing great waste.


In the cities, towns and riverside villages, the population is easily supplied and in @(Joazeiro),
 
[166]
@(S. Raymundo Nonato), @(Porto Nacional), and @(Goiás) there are sellers of water in barrels, no city or town has piped water despite the extreme ease of obtaining it for some of them.
On farms, in general, the liquid is supplied by reservoirs; the inhabitants of the village of @(Parnaguá) get their water from the lake of the same name or, which is more common, from wells dug in certain places.
In @(Caracol) the water for all uses comes from a shallow lake; the inhabitants try to use one of the banks for washing clothes and watering animals, while the other is reserved for the population to drink. However, this care is not always taken; we can see in many places, in the only existing water tank, the separation by a wooden fence, with the internal part reserved for the residents and the external part for other uses. Just beyond @(Petrolina) this practice begins to be observed. The separation, as is easily understood, is perfectly theoretical and in fact what occurs is the regime of common water for men and animals; it is useless to remind the dangers of such promiscuity because, it is a deep-rooted belief, that “nothing sticks to water”.
In the village of @(Lago), with 25 to 40 homes and belonging to the district of @(Santana), municipality of @(Riacho de Casa Nova), @(Bahia), the water used by the residents is incredibly polluted. In @(Jatobá), a locality in the municipality of @(Remanso), the centrifuged water gave 10 cc3. of volume and the deposit 0.1 cc3., which is equivalent to 10 cc3. per liter and the operation was carried out with a hand-held centrifuge of the KRAUSE type. In certain areas of Maniçoba, water is extremely scarce and is sold by the barraquistos at exorbitant prices.
There are places where the water shortage is so great that each resident cannot use more than 2 to 3 liters per day; the scarcity of this element certainly explains the physical disrepair of the majority of the population of @(Central Brazil), where the habit of bathing only exists for the inhabitants of the banks of lakes and watercourses.
In certain stretches of the trail, it is necessary to force the march in order to land in a certain waterhole, usually of poor quality; in some large plateaus, it is essential to use a leather or canvas container, called “rubbers” and which are filled with water, in order to be able to cross. These observations only cover the regions of Bahia, Pernambuco and Piauí; in Goiás, water still exists in great abundance, with the exception of some more central areas.
Only in the cities and towns are there relatively well-built houses; the most important cities on the route are @(Juazeiro) and @(Goiás); in these there are 2-story buildings; in all the towns visited, 2-story houses only exist in @(S. Raymundo Nonato) (1) and @(vila do Duro) also 1; the lighting in a small part of @(Juazeiro) is petroleum and in @(Goiás) partly acetylene, in the others there is nothing in this regard.
In the entire caatinga region, up to the vicinity of @(S. Raymundo), there is not even
There is not a single house that is not covered with tiles; this is explained by the rarity of palm trees and thatch. This requires the existence of the pottery industry and, seen from a distance, Petrolina and Juazeiro are picturesque with their red roofs, as the climate does not allow the growth of cryptogamous vegetation that darkens them. Comfort in Petrolina is much less than in Joazeiro, and in the best houses, the “little creature” invades the rooms. Far from the towns, at first glance, you can recognize the house of a large farmer because it is whitewashed; the furniture consists of a large wooden table, some benches and wooden pieces on the walls that serve to support hammocks; the living room is also whitewashed, the internal rooms are generally only plastered; the lighting is provided by a large kerosene lamp made of painted tin sheets; the floor is covered in rectangular bricks.


[167]
There are no closets and the furniture that replaces them is leather and wooden chests. In the caatinga area the rafters and beams are made of mandacaru; however, the housing described above is a minority, since the rule is not to whitewash the walls, although lime is sold for 200 rs. per bag in some places, where it is abundant; however, the furniture is always the same. The windows do not have glass panes and this practice is observed in the towns and cities of Goiás, with the exception of the capital. In the entire city of @(Porto Nacional) there is only one house with glass panes.
However, as soon as the palm trees appear, the tiled houses disappear as if by magic to make way for the huts; in Piauí and Bahia, carnauba and piassava trees are used for this purpose; in addition to this material, it is very common to find houses covered with the bark of the “pau de casca” (bark tree), a plant species that we were unable to identify for sure. Some maniçobeiros’ huts are covered with grass and have an external coating of clay, which must constitute excellent shelter for the triatomes; however, this method of proceeding is rare, as we only observed it once.
There are houses so primitive that they don't even use clay; they are woven from sticks covered with "bark wood" or palm leaves, which also complete the wall covering.
Clothing is as rudimentary as possible and, except in the caatinga region, where the abundance of thorns makes the use of leather sandals mandatory, the rest of the route the inhabitants generally go barefoot. This habit is so common that, even in uniform, we never saw the police stations in São Raymundo Nonato and Parnaguá wearing shoes. Children of both sexes from poorer families go naked even when they are well grown; adults live in rags. When working, the cowboys of Bahia, Pernambuco and Piauí dress entirely in leather, the only clothing capable of withstanding the thorns of such hostile flora.
In those poor places, where the picturesque is so rare, the cowboys are characters worthy of all sympathy and admiration: on several occasions, we surprise them on the road, in the arduous task of herding, and only those who have witnessed it can appreciate the extraordinary physical energy and unparalleled courage they possess; they demonstrate that those people have energies capable of the greatest feats and to this day, we have seen nothing in terms of boldness, composure, resistance and agility, comparable to the feats of those men.
In the towns and cities on the banks of São Francisco, the black element is still quite numerous; however, as the traveler goes deeper, this becomes increasingly rare and is almost completely replaced by a mixed-race type whose color, measured and calm way of speaking, almost without gesturing, reveal that they are descendants of the original inhabitants of the region; this element forms the majority of the population. In the interior regions of Bahia, Pernambuco and Piauí, the presence of a red-haired type with blue eyes is very common and they are known by the locals as “laranja”. We have heard references to this fact for a long time, even from foreign writers, and the explanation generally adopted is that they were descendants of the Dutch; the fact, for us, has another explanation, since we believe that it appeared spontaneously and we can verify this with some blond children descended from parents and grandparents who, although white, were not even blond; It may not be correct to identify the phenomenon with what &(DEVRIES) called mutation, but there is undoubtedly an analogy.
Do not imagine that this is a sporadic fact; on the contrary, in some places, the fact will draw anyone's attention. In @(Goias) the element resulting from the fusion of black and Indian dominates, with the primitive prevailing; this in the north is explainable by the waves of slaves who served in the exploration of gold and whose remains can be found at every step. In the south, the white element already predominates and the inhabitants are more vigorous.


[168]
The predominant religion is Catholicism, although it is riddled with exaggerations and superstitions. In almost all homes, even in cities such as Juazeiro and Petrolina, you can see crosses painted on the doors or windows; in the towns of Goiás, they make them out of wood and nail them to the main wall of the residence. In Almas, this practice is strictly observed and without exception, in only one home; the cross is made not at the inauguration of the residence, but when there is an epidemic, and once placed, it is never removed.
Worship is sometimes mixed with profane worship, as we saw in @(S. José da Canastra) in a chapel decorated with paintings representing animals; the use of written prayers nailed to the walls continues to be widespread; most of them contain sayings to combat epidemics and, in the areas of the maniçobeiros, their depredations; others are nailed in the fields praying against the scourge of droughts. In the municipality of @(Corrente), Protestantism in recent years has gained a large number of followers to the point of dominating in some localities; however, no change for the better is perceived with the acquisition of a new creed; in the village of @(Parnaguá) there is also a Protestant nucleus, whose influence on the moral or material improvement of the inhabitants is not noticeable. Upon arrival in @(Porto Nacional) of the boats returning from @(Pará) and which constitutes a great local festival, the vessels fly the flag of the Holy Spirit; rare are those where there is also a national flag.
The friars exercise absolute control, but, apart from the Dominicans, worthy of all respect for the great work of charity that they have been carrying out for more than 20 years in Central Brazil, the others are nothing more than vile exploiters.
The regions of Bahia, Pernambuco and Piauí are periodically visited by friars of various denominations and nationalities on “missions”; this is what is called a stay in a given place, where for a few days, they perform religious services that are all paid for, with the exception of confession. A few days after a “mission” had set off, we spent some time in the place called @(Peixe) — @(Bahia); the friars stayed for about 12 days and performed hundreds of weddings, baptisms and confirmations, because residents from all over the region flock to the place where the “mission” is being carried out. After a few days, small change becomes scarce and then the friars start to trade with ajiò. But the worst evil is the fierce war and crusade that they wage in the name of religion against civil marriage, which is fanatically rejected by the unfortunate #sertanejos, as we saw daily. Among the curious customs of the people, there is a wedding held on the night of St. John, which takes place next to a bonfire, in the presence of the parents of the bride and groom, godparents, family members, and guests, and is considered valid for all intents and purposes. The isolation in which they live, and the great distance they would have to travel to reach the place where a priest could be found, suggested to them the poetic simplicity of a civil contract, anointed by the fervor of their beliefs. Well, when the missionaries pass by, it becomes necessary for couples who have been together for many years to contribute as alms, with the equivalent of twice the amount of a normal wedding, so that the union may be blessed.
It is time for the authorities to intervene and they will certainly do so, with the moral patronage of the church, since the cardinal himself has already issued a bull to his vicars regarding the duties of priests in relation to civil marriage; and it is necessary for the sake of the decorum of the Catholic religion that the ignominy of commercial missions cease.
Fortunately, as a comforting contrast, there are Dominican friars installed in @(Porto Nacional); they do exercise the priesthood with all dignity and their intelligent, humanitarian and civilizing action will certainly be inscribed in the history of Brazilian civilization. In the city of @(Porto Nacional), next to the superb Roman-style church,


[169]
The only valuable building found along the entire route are high schools run by nuns where arts and crafts and reading are taught to a large number of children. Throughout the north of Goiás up to the Capital, civil marriage is held in high esteem by the Dominicans, who require their faithful to legalize the Catholic union they have performed; the information on this subject is unanimous among the residents. In the State Capital, the Dominicans have set up an asylum where about a hundred creatures are sheltered. From Curralinho to Anhanguera, the Redemptorists have dominated for some years; to this day they have done nothing useful, they have not even set up a school; they declare war on civil marriage and, like the first missionaries mentioned, they vilely exploit the population.
The war on civil marriage has led people to reject civil registration of any kind, with the exception of the towns of Pernambuco where all registrations, except for deaths, are carried out regularly, which has surprised us. Deaths are never registered and burials are carried out without the slightest civil formality, since not even a guide from the authorities is necessary. It is already clear that cities are exempt, or rather, the central part of cities and towns, because in the suburbs the gaps are already great.
When there is a cemetery nearby, the funeral procession passes through some areas to carry the body, but in places where there are few houses, the body is carried in a hammock at dusk. The procession moves quickly; in front, carrying a light, walks a man who intermittently calls out: “Brother of souls”. This is an appeal made to the inhabitants and to travelers who happen to pass by, in order to help transport the body. The grave is always shallow, and a cross is planted on it and flowers are placed, which are occasionally renewed, even by travelers. When the number of inhabitants is large, a cemetery is then built; it is an enclosure made of thick stakes and has no door; to enter, some sticks are moved; in the center, a large wooden cross rises, dominating the enclosure. Walled cemeteries are only found in large towns; In some locations in Piauí and Goiás, the burials of the best local families are still carried out inside churches, as we can see in @(Jití), @(Parnaguá) and @(Descoberto).
The person in charge of the Civil Registry of the village of @(S. Raymundo Nonato), allowed us to copy the data entered in the books and which contain information on the entire municipality of @(S. Raymundo Nonato): 1909, 4 deaths; 1910, 2 deaths; 1911, 6 deaths; 1912, up to May 16 inclusive, 14 deaths, the employee however assured us that up until this month, the number of deaths had certainly risen above 100.
Some judges of law, from time to time, go to the “disobligation”; this name is given by the people, to the necessity that obliges the friars to establish the missions; the civil servants take advantage of the popular designation, when they go out to legitimize marriages and births of the inhabitants under their jurisdiction; only a few take their understanding and duty to this point.
However, the government is very zealous in collecting these unheard-of taxes; @(Piauí) will serve as an example, since it is from this state that our records are most complete. Each calf born pays $2 if it is exported $3, a cow $5; exported leather pays 800 rs; all cattle, with the exception of goats and pigs, which are exempt, are taxed 10% ad valorem and for the purposes of collection, horses are valued at $50 and donkeys at $100. These taxes are state taxes, but the municipality demands payment of between $500 réis and $4,200, depending on the region, for the slaughtered cattle. The state also charges property and slaughterhouse taxes; it is obvious that with such a system, farmers give false information about the calves born on their properties. If the farmer rises up against the Government, the tax collector exaggerates production,


[170]
which is charged judicially until the opponent is ruined, this more than anything, explains the way those who are owners in these parts are always being situationists.
From the following extract we made from the 1914 message, presented to the State Congress by the Governor of Piauí, Dr. MIGUEL ROSA, it can be seen that the government itself already recognizes the inaccuracy of the information concerning the pastoral industry. The message says:


"The basis of the tithe tax is the assessment made by the collector according to the information provided by the interested party. The tax representative rarely deviates from the information, under any suspicion.”


“The best evidence for this statement is in the statistics from last year. In the entire state, 6,845 cattle farms were opened, “1,108 horse farms and 165 mule farms. @(Oeiras) has the largest number of cattle farms; 491. Next in this order are: @(Paulista) 355; @(Jaicós) 344; @(Valença) 304; descending to @(Caracol), which only has 27. In horse farms, the one with the largest number of farms is @(Jerumenha) ; 106.
They are followed by @(Valença), 98; @(Alto Longá), 89; @(Castelo) 78; @(Campo Maior) 77; descending to @(Pedro II) and @(Santa Philomena), which do not count a single one.
“Farms with mules are few and do not exist at all in these municipalities: @(Bom Jesus), @(Santa Philomena), @(Gilbués), @(S. Raymundo Nonato), @(Simplicio Mendes), @(Urussuí), @(Pedro II), @(Amarante), @(Livramento), @(Peripery), @(Altos), @(Parnahyba), @(Porto Alegre), @(União) and @(Caracol).


“The tax is levied on this production:


Garrotes...................... 55 517.
Foals........................ 3,245.
Donkeys and asses .. 294.
They do not pay tax on foals @(Santa Philomena), @(Pedro II) and @(Caracol), and on donkeys and mules, all listed as not having farms of a rez.


These figures are far from expressing the truth.”
The Statistics Service of the Ministry of Agriculture, based on data collected in 1913, gives @(Piauí) as having 1,163,000 cattle, 266,000 horses, 96,000 donkeys and mules, 63,000 goats, and 325,000 pigs. Our impression, based on what we have seen in several of the largest livestock-raising municipalities, is that the aforementioned information is greatly exaggerated. The data concerning @(Goiás), which we know better in this respect than @(Piauí), give a total livestock herd of 3,168,000 head, and are also, from our observation, even more exaggerated. We covered almost the entire pastoral area of @(Goias) and were surprised by such a high total. As was to be expected, education is very little widespread; A teacher from Pernambuco, whose school was closed, calculated that illiteracy in the caatingas was 80% and we can assess the rudimentary level of those who know how to read, based on the letters written by this schoolmaster, who earned his living as a scribe, which he carried out from farm to farm.
In fact, we observed a strong desire on the part of parents to teach their children, since it is common to see itinerant teachers who, for $3 per student per month, set up shop on farms for a period of time. Especially in @(Piauí), the desire to learn is noticeable: in @(S. Raymundo Nonato), for example, in addition to the public school, there is another subsidized by private schools at a price of $5 per student; the public teacher receives $60, which with the discounts comes to $50, always paid late. In @(Parnaguá) there are two very popular public schools; in @(Goiás) illiteracy is even higher and it is not far from the truth that it is estimated at at least 95% in the north of the state. The few existing teachers organize special multiplication tables that the students memorize and sing in chorus, which say: “1 copper 40 rs.. 2 coppers and a half 1 tostão” and so on. In @(Goiás) this practice is essential, because the people of the town are completely unaware of the monetary value in réis of the currency; 500


[171]
réis are called 12 and a half coppers: 1 dime corresponds to 1$ etc. etc.. In @(Porto Nacional) and nearby areas, the Dominicans issue vouchers printed on paper, which are accepted as legal tender. To this day we still have fond memories of a hubbub that caught our attention as we passed a group of houses in a very poor town in @(Goias) called @(Tanque); when we approached, we came across a private school with only 8 students, doing school exercises; once again, the ardent desire of those people to escape illiteracy, which the negligence of the public authorities does not try to combat, was evident.
The metric system adopted by the country is only common among educated people in cities and towns; the people still reject it and its measurements in use continue to be the palm, cubit, rod, eighth and ounce. But the anachronism that most attracts attention due to the confusion it causes to the traveler is that related to the measurements of capacity, which vary in locations within the same state. The plate varies from 2 to 4 liters; the quart is equivalent to 16 plates in Bahia and 30 in Piauí; some locations in Pernambuco adopt the cuia unit of ~9 liters. In Goiás, the salamim is used --5 plates or 10 liters; the quart has a smaller capacity, since it measures only 40 liters. The only measurement of weight that has become common is the kilo; however, all large weights are referred to the arroba unit. The itinerary measurements are based on the league, which, with the measurements made daily with a pedometer, gave us an average of 4 kilometers; in @(Goias), however, the league has great variations, which the people call “big league” or “small league”. The big league almost never exceeds 4 kilometers, so the information concerning the distance to be covered is sometimes the most disparate. There are practically no roads and the only one that deserves this name was recently built between @(S. Raymundo) and Remanso, by the company that explores the large maniçobal planted there. Most of the route was done on the common road, which is nothing more than a path; certain stretches, however, are not even
this existed making the journey difficult.
In the Bahian plains, there is a large area of marshes that is still dangerous, especially for troops, and guides are needed.
The transportation of cargo is done in the most primitive way possible, on mules or donkeys, locally called donkeys. In this regard, the people of Goiás are better equipped than the inhabitants of other states. It is a rule that each troop takes spare animals (''trained animals'') and, in remote places, it is essential to carry corn for the animals, since pasture is not always available.
The animals are not shod, which causes great damage to the horses in certain rocky areas. Only from @(Descoberto) @(Goias) to the south do we “shoe” the animals, as they say there; in fact, it would be almost impossible to do without this measure, due to the immense quantity of pebbles and stones that cover the paths from that location to @(Capital of Goiás).
Someone, reproducing in a photograph the method of transportation used in the north of Brazil, pointed out that the same system was used 4 thousand years ago by the Egyptians, forgetting to add, however, that it was certainly used on better roads. Between the capital of Goiás and Anhanguera, the sedan chair is still used to transport ladies of better standing. In the Rio de São Francisco and some tributaries, in addition to steam navigation, there are sailing boats, very characteristic and picturesque, and small boats commonly called packet boats. The Rio Tocantins is navigated by large barges and in the less populated rivers, the transportation of goods is done on rafts built with buriti palm stems.
Along the entire route of over 3500 kilometers from @(Petrolina), we only found a railway in Anhanguera (Goiás). The first telegraph station was in @(city of Goiás).
The postal service exists in all cities and towns, with the exception of @(Parnaguá) which formerly had it. All residents of Piauí and @(Goiás) complain bitterly about the postal service;


[172]
It is impossible for the inhabitants of the south of @(Piauí) to subscribe to periodicals from the capital of Bahia or Rio, because they never reach their recipients; nor can they trust the money, because they are certainly diverted. In a country like @(Brazil), where magazines are lacking, the role played by these is more or less fulfilled by certain periodicals from the south, and it is certainly regrettable that the rare farmers who wish to follow the acquisitions of industry, agriculture, etc., find themselves deprived of the only element of dissemination, albeit imperfect, that the country has.
Only 3 locations have newspapers; @(Juazeiro), @(Porto Nacional) and @(Goiás); none are daily, some have scarce telegraph service. Circulation is exclusively local; in the entire state of Goiás, there are 8 newspapers, half of which are in the capital.
Those who travel have to count on their own
own resources, and the hope of


find hotels and guesthouses, which only
exist in the cities of Juazeiro and Petrolina,
and in the town of Formosa; between the Capital
from Goias and Anhauguera, any farm
provides paid accommodation. In the villages,
mainly in Piauhí, hospitality
given by people of influence, c in all


senses unsurpassed; the small farmers-
ros and the people of the people, facilitate the pain-
measured within homes, but indirectly
te, they charge by selling at discounted prices.
measured, the foodstuffs intended for food
tion and acquired by the traveler; this practice


It is mainly used in Bahia or by


children of this State, inhabiting the regions per-
from Nambuco and Piauí.


In Piauí, it is customary for the farmer to
need accommodation and food for those who land


in your home; this custom sometimes makes
hospitality is costly, especially in


housing close to very busy roads
ted, which has led many to change


the home away from the path.


The results gathered on our excursion
are largely due to the request
of affection shown to us by several fa-
zendeiros who, in every way, gave us


the most determined help.


The nature of the inhabitants is peaceful,
all certain facts, reveal a


background of inexplicable cruelty.
Anyone who visits the town of Formosa,
i still find the traces of struggles relative-
| recent minds, locked between 2 potentates
; local, we believe that in 1909; farms were dis-


: departures, burned-out houses, all sorts of de-
satines and persecutions, including murders


d^ children and women and shooting and em-
'palace of the wife of one of the chiefs, which
1 was pregnant In the main


: on the village street, you can see several houses on fire.
of, on the outskirts of the town however, c


: that one can measure the horrors committed c
; hear astonishing tales of such savagery-
| laugh.


The barbaric punishment inflicted on the conquerors
j tators of women married to farmers


; and which consists of castration or emasculation
; total, shame, which has been several times
■ applied mainly in certain areas of the
í @(Piauí), and whose principals and agents are always unanimously acquitted, because local morality judges the criminal with sympathy for having defied a delicate matter of honor, episodes that are narrated with terrible detail and with gestures of assent and applause from those present, force the city dweller to be judged as having a better character. This cruel process of defiance of local morality was, in all probability, brought by Africans, and is a common practice among many black tribes of @(Africa). The custom so widespread in @(Central Brazil) and in other states of @(Brazil) of mutilating the incisors is also due to the Africans. In certain areas of Brazil, it is common to find individuals of both sexes with triangular incisor teeth, especially the upper ones. This savage prosthesis is called “pointing”; the “pointed teeth” are prepared by an operator who, with the blade of a penknife or dagger driven by


[173]
a quick blow cuts off a certain lateral portion of the tooth. Facts of this nature have been reported by several Africanists. They have even been the subject of medical research, such as that which gave rise to the work of &(ANDERSON, GR), published under the title "Sonic tribal custonis in thcir relation to medicine and morals, and appearing on pages 239-278 of the Fourth Report of thc Wcl come Tropical • Research Laboratories Vol. B.-Khartoun, 1911.
Crime rates are expected to be high; most criminals escape easily, since crimes are generally committed premeditatedly and almost always surprise the victim treacherously. The jailer of @(Parnaguá) informed us that, in the space of 1 year, he had under his guard 9 prisoners accused of murder or attempted murder, carried out in the municipality.
Precocious murders are not uncommon; during our crossing, a child had killed another a few days before our passage in @(Caracol) and, in the village of @(Parnaguá), a boy was being held for the same crime; information about these cases is not scarce. Prisoners are kept without restraint when there are strong enough prisons; in @(Caracol) the prisoner is kept in stocks; however, this process is only used there while the prisoner awaits transfer to the detention center in the village of @(S. Raimundo). In @(Duro), a convicted murderer lived with an iron collar around his neck and chained to the wall. During the days that we remained there, the torture devices were removed from him, but the traces left by use were clearly visible.
The jury is no more imperfect than that of more advanced parts of the country; the acquittal of criminals depends on the greater or lesser prestige they have in the area.
The abandonment in which the populations of @(Central Brazil) lie has contributed greatly to increasing the natural spirit of routine that dominates them; a large number of inhabitants, perhaps the majority, are misoncists. They are practically impervious to progress, because in places where artifacts of modern industry are sold at prices perfectly within the reach of the pockets of a large number of
residents are repelled for a thousand and one reasons; for example: the simple coffee grinder is almost never seen; the pestle continues to be irreplaceable, the sewing machine is completely unused, despite the fact that residents in much of the route are forced to dress in leather, whose clothes continue to be sewn by hand. Despite the water being generally of poor quality, the use of any filter, even the most primitive and which could be made on site, at negligible cost, is completely unknown. The sugar mill is inferior to that used in @(Pernambuco) at the time of Dutch rule, by comparison with the design given by &(PISO) and &(MARCGRAV); in this particular case, therefore, the tendency is to regress. The


name currently used to designate the


place where sugar is made is the sugar cane mill”; nothing is more primitive or so


rudimentary; 30% of the broth is lost due to
from the imperfection of expressions, everything is


done with great delay, there being ne-
need for employment of 10 people who


occupy for 16 hours, only interrupted
for a short period of time, employ-
cattle in short meals; the work pro-
lasts all night. The staff distributes
It is done in the following way: two people


(1 man and a boy) in the ox cart
of two joints, for conducting the material
from the sugarcane field to the mill, 2 sugarcane cutters, 2
grinders, 3 women at work on the pan
1 “banker” (individual who works in
check the point of the sugar syrup) because
all this in action, manages to find out 240
kilos at most, of shavings.
This is the common cane sickness; ha
larger, without a doubt, rare with a still


but, of these, on our route we only found them in the south of @(Goiás), where close to the @(Capital), we saw the first steam engine at @(Fazenda Fleury) after such a long journey.


[174]
Cassava flour allows for less equipment and is easily made in any
part; the bread is completely unknown
outside the cities and towns, and of these,
not all of them have it. In general there are no bins
to store beans, corn, etc.; these cereals
are introduced into huge leather bags i
which are cooked; this process, in fact, is
better than the conservation in the barns


closed, as it prevents access to the
Coleoptera species of the genus Calandra ■


CLA1RV. and which are known there by the name of “carôcha” and whose damage is '
well known.


Once, in a quite Bahian dwelling,
far from any town, we had


of its owner, the exact definition of what
in fact it is the isolated country house of
world, without resources, without means of communi- •
cation, telegraphs and mail; where the news i
of what goes on the planet is transmitted orally:
mind by the rare traveler who passes by, or brought by the newly-received one sent as a messenger
{“positive”) and bearer of a letter or message
of a distant friend or relative, dealing with 1
urgent business. When considering the difficulty:
material to overcome distances, to populate'
those wastelands, that the day of the


railway passing through there, which, although
old man didn't notice the slightest difference


for better than when I was a child, and,
certain that their grandchildren will die old • leaving things as they found them, ending up |
bou resignedly closing in a painful * but true image: “this here, c urna j
open grave”.
The farmer was right, because it won't be
not even in the old age of today's children, who
those plagues will be revealed to progress
and civilization; when it is said that the village
of Parnaguá was elevated to this category cm
1634, possessing today, with all the surroundings
600 inhabitants, and, after qttasi 3 centuries


of existence remains relatively to the era
ca, on the same day it was founded
given and whose tendencies to regress are


patents; that @(Caracol), in the municipality of @(S. Raymundo), with its 150 houses, founded


by &(JOSÉ DIAS SOARES) almost 130 years ago,
nothing leading to the assumption that in the near future
future see your conditions modified,


are facts that provoke meditation when they are pro-
cure the explanation.


Although the events are maintained through oral tradition, the descendants of the conquerors of northeastern Brazil know nothing about the primitive inhabitants of the areas or the names of the tribes that dominated there; (the people who refer to the ancient indigenous people are always called “tapuios”. @(Caracol) was conquered by force “from the tapuios”, that was all that tradition has preserved. From the information provided by &(DOMIGOS DIAS SOARES), son of the founder of @(Caracol), and which can be read on page 3S of the work cited below, it can be inferred that the Indians displaced from @(Caracol) belonged to a different tribe than the Cherentes; they were probably the Pimenteiras, a tribe that, according to the informant, inhabited the “land that runs from the headwaters of the @(Piauí) up towards the backlands of @(Pernambuco)”. This tribe was considered by &(EHRENREiCH) as belonging to the group of Carib tribes, and by this author considered them to be very different from the Tupis and the Gés; it is not inappropriate to remember that, throughout the area probably inhabited by the aforementioned tribe, there are still and, in some places abundantly, a certain tree, one of the most conspicuous in those parts, which has a name that identifies the one designated
by &(EHRENREICH). Every now and then, right
name, evokes the struggle between the Aborijene and the
conquerors, like “Battle” for more
at once repeated during the route; but
the tradition has been completely lost.


In the crossed regions of @(Bahia), @(Pernambuco) and @(Piauí), all that is shown and known about the ancient inhabitants are some drawings opened on the pavement, and which can still be seen today very close to the village of @(Parnaguá), representing animals crudely executed and erased, with the exception of 2 perfectly visible monkeys. In all probability, the authors of these drawings were the Cherentes Indians because at least


[175]
1827, frequented the surroundings of @(Parnaguá) as can be inferred from the “Documents on two tribes of Indians, which still existed in 1827 in the Province of @(Piauí)” and published on pp. 36-40 of T. II, 1st Bulletin of the “&(Revista da Sociedade de Geographia do Rio de Janeiro)” Year 1886.
However, it is the indigenous element that predominates in the population's constitution and some habits are preserved, such as the use of bow fishing, still used, although rarely, by some residents of the village of @(Parnaguá).
The trade is carried on by Brazilians, who peddle the goods on a loan with great ease; the price at which they are sold is always about 200% higher than in the nearby town; in fact, the difficulties of transportation and the delay in payments perfectly explain the exorbitant selling price at first sight. Only small sales require payment in cash; large transactions are made by exchanging cattle for goods, in full or in half, with the remainder in currency.
We are convinced that one of the main causes, and in our opinion the most important, of the backwardness of the northeastern regions is the lack of immigrants. Excluding @(Juazeiro) and @(Petrolina), we found only 19 foreigners on the long journey to @(Capital of Goiás), namely: 2 naturalized Italians and employees of the Inspectorate and 2 English in the town of @(S. Raymundo Nonato); 1 Arab in @(Pedro do Fogo) @(Bahia), 3 Portuguese (2 religious), 10 French (5 friars and 5 Dominican nuns), in @(Porto Nacional); 1 Frenchman near @(Amaro Leite) (Goiás).
According to the report presented in 1914 to the National Congress by the Minister of Agriculture, it can be seen that in 1913 192,683 immigrants entered @(Brazil), of which only 2,150 went to @(Bahia), with none going to the States of @(Piauí), @(Pernambuco) and @(Goias).
Without the help of immigration, it will be difficult to galvanize routine populations, living in lands that are legendarily rich but that, in reality, are far from this. In São Marcello, a local businessman, Mr. José dos Reis, told us that for some time he had an Italian colonist as a worker, who managed to transform a small tract of good land on the banks of the Rio Preto into a large, fertile and abundant garden; when he left, everything declined, due to the impossibility of obtaining persevering national workers. The accusation made against the climate in order to prevent foreign colonization is absurd; on the banks of the great rivers, where water is never lacking and which constitute almost exclusively the only fertile portions of the entire region, the climate is perfectly compatible with the human life of foreigners belonging to any race; the essential thing is to improve the detestable means of communication, since the existing ones, including the railway and river steam, are terrible. Cattle to be sold need to be taken to the nearest fair, which in some regions is hundreds of leagues away. A practice that greatly hinders private initiative is the current practice of using huge estates, which, due to their size, make systematic exploitation difficult. Furthermore, huge farms rarely belong to a single owner; they are all owned by many families, as the rule is that they are not shared; the farm being the property of dozens of owners, which prevents harmonious action towards a given exploitation.
In @(S. Marcello), some traders prefer to have their goods collected on mules from the city of @(Barra), due to the greater speed and guarantee that this primitive mode of transport offers, despite the town being an obligatory stop for the steamers of the &(Viação Fluvial). The use by private individuals of the navigation of the @(S. Francisco), with modern and cheap oil-powered vessels, cannot be carried out by anyone, since the contract of the company that so poorly explores navigation on that river, guarantees it an exclusive monopoly.
We do not know how the legend, now difficult to destroy, was created throughout @(Brazil), that


[176]
All its soil, besides being fertile, is extremely rich in mines; the maps, even the most modern ones, contain gross errors regarding the location of even cities and important geographical features of the northeast region; nevertheless, they sprinkle, at the editor's whim, information about fantastic riches of the subsoil and indicate no less false cultures. In turn, there is no national writer who, when writing any information about the aforementioned areas, does not include a long catalogue of representatives of the flora and fauna, whose absence or scarcity is immediately obvious to any traveler. These are certainly works prepared in distant offices and guided by biased information from the naive residents of the area, always ready to see riches at every step.
It is very common for farmers to mention hidden riches in the subsoil and indicated in lost itineraries, or even to exhibit fragments of various minerals, which are shown with all due caution, since they were found on lands that they own. Disillusioned by the traveler regarding the samples, they keep them in their bags, hoping that one day the prodigious miracle of sudden wealth will come to tear them away from the modest conditions in which they live.
In @(Goias) then, due to the success of alluvial gold extraction, today visibly exhausted, it is useless for anyone to want to show that they should not harbor hope in this regard and, the citation that several foreign technicians, even recently, tried in several places in the State after prior studies, to install companies that died due to the shortage of gold, is of no use.
Agriculture is very backward and there are practically only corn, beans, rice, tobacco and sugarcane plantations; only in @(Caracol) and @(S. Marcello) did we see coffee plantations, which are small, by the way. It is rare to find a farm with an orchard; some more enterprising people build gardens that support earthen trays where they plant some vegetables. In @(Juazeiro) and its surroundings, some inhabitants plant grapevines that produce excellent fruit, and which, according to information from several reputable people, bear fruit two or three times a year. Some annonaceae are also cultivated, and in particular the "pinha" (pineapple), as Atinotuisquamosa L. is called there, and that is all.
However, from what we observed along the entire route, including @(Goiás), there is a possibility for those places that, we are certain, will lift them out of their current state of misery. We are referring to the cotton plant, which grows and develops in the best way. The day that this problem is seriously addressed, studying the species and varieties that are best suited to the soil, then the great transformation will take place and abundance will come.
In fact, cotton extraction has already allowed in some places such as @(Perí-Perí), municipality of @(Santa Rita) @(Bahia) the existence of a small rudimentary industry, with the cotton being harvested, carded, woven and dyed on site, and the cloth sold for 800 rs. per rod. All the artifacts for weaving are made of wood and built by the residents.
In the Caatinga region, the livestock industry is mostly made up of goat farming, followed by cattle farming; they also raise donkeys, horses and mules, although on a smaller scale; sheep farming is rare everywhere. Outside the Caatinga region, goat farming has practically disappeared, to be replaced on a large scale by cattle farming. The southern region of Piauí is admirably suited to cattle and horse farming, and to this day we have seen nothing better in national specimens. Certain regions of the aforementioned state have excellent natural pastures, with almost no ticks, and absolutely no botflies. The probability of this area developing enormously is therefore assured.
It is easy to obtain specimens that reach 30 arrobas, which seems rare to us for national cattle without any mixture with purebred animals. The intelligent and scientific exploration of a certain part of the south of @(Piauí),


[177]
should be the object of attention on the part of the government of that State. In the regions of Bahia to the south, the average cattle weight ranges between 15 and 16 arrobas; ticks are abundant and botflies are already appearing; in the north of @(Goiás) the cattle are even smaller and the abundance of ticks and botflies takes away the hope of any attempt at rational breeding.
The folklorist could only glean something interesting with a lot of good will; the literature on the Folklore of northern Brazil has had several devotees, who have already contributed several works on the subject. The coastal populations were probably the ones that contributed the most, because those in the upper #sertão, to our great surprise, are extremely poor in this regard.
The common string instruments so common among the northern populations are almost non-existent among the inhabitants of @(Central Brazil), which leads to the absence of troubadours and therefore the best contributors to Folk-lore, nor did we see or know of the existence of any interesting local festival or custom, from the point of view in question, despite having spent S. João in the village of @(Parnaguá) where, apart from the traditional bonfire that one or another inhabitant lit, and the barbaric drumming that lasted all night, and which brought together a large number of residents, nothing else was observed.
Very little is sung in those parts and when someone does, it is a traveler or a muleteer who frequents other less sad lands. In the north of @(Goiás), when the cowboys gather the cattle to the corrals, one of them goes in front singing and acting as a guide.
This roaring is called “rebojar” and the melody, besides being very original as a composition, has, without a doubt, a strange beauty; the spectacle of the cattle moving along with the singer is one of the most picturesque and interesting that we have seen there.
Once at @(Peixe), @(Bahia), our attention was drawn to a friend of ours who took us to watch a “challenge” between two singers. There were two boys who, drumming their fingers on a bench, or making a iaca on a previously prepared barnbú like a reco-reco, in order not to lose the rhythm, improvised with astonishing speed the answers to give to the singer; and always inspired by the verse of the singer. The fact, new to us, left us a great impression due to the speed with which they improvised rhyming verses, making sense and generally being witty; This way of singing the “challenge” is called “light”, the rhymes are made in air or a. Some time later, we had the opportunity to watch other similar “challenges”, but soon, we realized that the verses are always the same, with the one who has the best memory winning. After some time, the interest was greatly diminished for the troubadours from the interior of @(Goiás) who, when singing the “light”, repeated, with small variations, the same verses in response to other identical ones, sung to the challenge in @(Piauí) and @(Bahia).
Almost 6 months of daily contact not only with the residents, but mainly with our comrades all born in @(Central Brazil), was enough time for us to be able to form a safe judgment of the habits and customs of that population.
Apart from “O boi espado”, the incomplete ABC of the famous Bahian highwayman called &(Lucas da Feira), fragments of A Nao Catarineta, which were always recited by the same comrade, we did not hear any other of the popular productions that fill the books of our folklorists; The same individual, at the request of his companions, told stories or sang xacaras, such as “A Flor do dia” and others perfectly Portuguese or European in the fable and a melody; the environment had inspired nothing or rather, the inhabitants were inspired
capable of creating something new, even in the field of “Folk-lore”.
The lower population of the village of @(Parnaguá) believes that the lagoon of the same name is inhabited by a child kidnapped by some supernatural being who holds it in his power;
[178]
On certain nights, the crying of the little prisoner can be heard. This poorly constructed and unattractive legend constitutes the only original contribution provided by the poor Brazilians of the northeast.
Tapera naevia (L.), the popular saci, although much better known than in the south, has its legendary prestige greatly diminished; honestly, today no one believes in the enchantments and wonders that the bird is capable of.
It is in the language used by the inhabitants of the upper #sertão that one can verify better than in any other field how little the exchange of ideas, facts and things between the coast and the @(Brazil) Central was felt.
The speech of Brazilians from the aforementioned area constitutes a very rich vein to be explored by the lexicographer, who will find an enormous number of words not yet recorded in the 2nd edition of &(CÂNDIDO DE FIGUEIREDO).
The most interesting thing, however, is the verification of words considered archaisms, even in old dictionaries, but which live there in full force. The verb trouver instead of bring, is the only one known by uneducated people who conjugate it in all tenses; caroável in the old meaning of propicio, is vulgar; nanja instead of não or nunca; mancar for faltar; apunhar instead of empunhar; adestro for spare.
Expressions used only in written and spoken language are in common use: mouco (deaf), enricar (to enrich), aguar (to water), laborar (to work), the Pleiades are called seven-star, a true light. The language's own tendency to transform nouns into verbs becomes even more pronounced among those people:
“Recursar” (to seek resources), “encardumar” (to form shoals), “er.cestar” (to place the ashes inside the “estiladeira”, “estilador” or even “cacite”, a domestic utensil in the shape of a hollow basket, where the ashes with which the “decoada” (bleach) is prepared are stored); “adjutorar” (to give help), “respostar” (to give an answer), “melar” (to extract honey), “paliar” (to obtain palliative care), “ensementar” (to fill with seeds), “milhar” (to provide corn for animals*), “custear” (to cross the animal with another of the same caste or breed), “embernar” (to acquire berne), “pulsar” (to take the pulse), “encangar” (to unite by tying up 2 animals, even if without a yoke, in order to march together), “pestear” (acquire or produce plague).
As the language, the objects of use themselves, are obsolete, the “legitimate Traga shotgun”, as can be read along the barrel, is in common use and the thick routine that surrounds everything in @(Central Brazil), allowed a caboclo who owned one of these shotguns to compare it with modern weapons, but which did not bring him any conviction of inferiority between his shotgun and a 12 gauge breech-loading shotgun.
In the area covered by @(Bahia), @(Pernambuco) and @(Piauí), there is a curious way of greeting among newcomers: they shake hands and then place one hand on the shoulder of another, while asking questions of a certain style. It is an obligatory greeting and probably represents a custom of etiquette used in other times.
The semantics of some words are altered: it is very common in the vicinity of the plains to use the verb “navigate” instead of “travel” when one wishes to designate long journeys. In the south of @(Goias), the word “viajar” is hardly used; the word in common use is “viajear” which is conjugated as follows. “Arnojar” and “amojado” have lost their old meaning of “milking” and are used to designate swellings of the genitals of animals close to giving birth.
The problem of droughts, as we have already said, is polyhedral, i.e., it must be approached from several sides. To consider it from only one side is to never reach the intended goal; it is useless to try to solve it with just one single measure, even if this is taken on a cyclopean scale and proportions; the visible tendency on the part of the inhabitants of these areas to believe that the presence of water is sufficient to operate the cubic transformation is entirely false.




General considerations
Even in the greenery that expresses the abundance of those lands, the diet of the majority of the population is insufficient and poor. In the caatinga region, the basis is made up of goat meat, flour and brown sugar: in Piauí and certain areas of Goiás, charque is made from beef. On cattle farms, milk is used in various ways and in abundance. Fresh meat and milk are excellent in Piauí; at certain times of the year, however, the cattle like to feed on a plant that imbues the meat and milk with an almost intolerable allium flavor. During the days that we stayed at Tanque farm, it was impossible to obtain milk with any other flavor and more than once, even well-cooked meat did nothing to mask the strong garlic flavor that it contained. The cause of this fact lies in the ingestion by cattle of a climbing plant commonly known as “garlic vine” and which is probably Adenocalymma alliaceum MIERS.


[179]
The riverside populations or those living on the banks of bodies of water such as the @(Parnaguá Lagoon) have the same level of prosperity or, better yet, are poor and live with the same lack of resources as the inhabitants of areas with scarce water. The problem in Central Brazil does not depend solely on water, which is abundant on the banks of the @(São Francisco), where there has never been a shortage and perhaps the residents swim in abundance? How long have the banks of the @(São Francisco) been populated? And yet, no city in the modern sense of the word has been built there. @(Juazeiro) with its 6 thousand inhabitants, despite being labeled as the “Princess of the #Sertão” is nothing more than a pile of people living in a town without sewage, lighting, running water, or paving; Compare it with the nucleus of the same population, even in southern @(Brazil), the difference is obvious and, if the comparison is made with the State of @(São Paulo), it is completely unfavorable for the northern towns. @(Juazeiro) was only chosen to show that, having all the resources of modern progress, it does not know how to take advantage of them. In that city a railroad ends and the river service of @(São Francisco) begins; therefore, there are the necessary elements of transportation and communication routes, well, these elements are of almost no use; it is difficult to surprise the reasons for such facts; a few kilometers away from @(Juazeiro), one is practically in the same conditions as someone who was hospitalized hundreds of kilometers from that city and, except for the resource of proximity to communication routes, the rest is perfectly analogous, i.e., the #sertão in all its primitiveness.
In @(Brazil), the #sertão acquired prestige through a dithyrambic literature; it was this ill-fated way of telling things that transformed the “desertão” into the Chanaan of indigenous rhetoric; in fact, this was the feature of national literature since its initial book, when its author &(BENTO TEIXEIRA) wrote the Dialogue of the Greatness of Brazil; this style shaped the model that is followed to this day. Nowhere on the globe are there such fierce lands, such lavish nature; so much opulence is proverbial and yet how far from the truth all this is. The main cause of the backwardness of Central Brazil is the scarce wealth of the soil; this statement goes against a legend created by the exaltation of the sons of those areas; the #sertanejo fights hard for life, trying to get the means of subsistence from an ungrateful land; he pastures and takes care of the land in the most rudimentary way, taking advantage of the low water i. that is, the place abandoned when the waters go down; they live poorly, are satisfied with little and are relatively happy due to their ignorance of the true situation in which they live.
The nation is not aware of the true state of the areas affected by droughts. Even the children of those lands, who were raised by fortune to high political positions, generally have no knowledge of their native soil, since they were raised in the state capitals or in the south of the country. In any case, the only memory that remains is that of childhood, and at this age, everything is easily portentous. The rhythm that droughts follow has ended up leaving distant compatriots indifferent; human solidarity easily fades when the evil is continuous and the distance at which the affected populations live only allows for sincere interest on the part of their fellow countrymen.
Today, when we feel a deep sympathy for those people who have been unfairly forgotten by the government, we were concerned about writing a statement in which the lack of suspicion in the language could be more useful than the easy and fallacious eulogies. Anyone who, when passing through those regions, examines the social conditions of those people, will soon be surprised by a backward and rudimentary organization; the caatingas are populated by inhabitants living on the fringes of civilization; there is no legal family organization, since couples only get married by civil marriage by exception; children are almost never registered.
[180]
burials take place in the absence of any legal formality. The wealthier and more educated farmer exercises great influence among the residents, and this influence only ceases when he comes into contact with the sphere of influence of another owner who is at least as wealthy; this is what is observed far from the population centers.
In fact, it is impossible to avoid it; each farm is a large estate whose dimensions are ever increasing as it moves away from the cities; small properties are almost non-existent, so that the inhabitants are in any case dependent on the landowner. The shortage of labor is enormous and constitutes one of the greatest shortages; this fact has led to the widespread situation of contracts. In general, in addition to the cowboy, the farmer has hired a certain number of people for low wages to guarantee the work on the farm.
In the entire area where maniçoba rubber is exploited, slavery practically exists; the barraquista, as the owner of the personnel who extract the maniçoba is called, entices people from the riverside villages and takes them to the area to be exploited under the promise of high salaries; a certain amount is paid in advance for the purchase of objects and to be left with the family; in the place where the barracões are set up, a warehouse owned by the barraquista is set up and where the personnel are obliged to supply themselves at the prices set by the owner, which are at least double the current price in the nearest “business”; in the areas where water is scarce, this is sold to the maniçoba workers; after a while, the employee is in debt and is unable to leave until he has paid off the debt, which only grows. Any escape or rebellion is useless; the teams are guarded in full view by armed foremen and the system is so widespread that, even at the @(Fazenda Serra) run by two Englishmen, the foremen work with rifles in hand; In fact, there is no slavery of the personnel there; it is a plantation, with a few million manioc trees where 400 men work; the worker can earn from $5 to $60 per week, depending on the capacity developed; at the time we were there, the plantations were 5 years old and the personnel lived in ranches organized by the company. All the workers are nationals and the owners brought in a large group of blacks from @(Barbados) who, after some time, had to be fired because they proved to be unfit and incapable. Of the entire area visited, @(Fazenda da Serra) located in the municipality of @(São Raimundo Nonato), constitutes the only systematic and intelligently managed farm.
The authorities do not give a strong hand to the smuggler who searches for the fugitive debtor and, in @(Parnaguá village), we had the displeasure of witnessing the arrest of 4 smugglers taken by force to the shack of a smuggler, already famous in the entire area we passed through, for the crimes committed.
In the general areas between @(Bahia) and @(Goiás), rubber from the mangabeira tree is exploited; the “mangabeiros” work independently and fortunately, the slavery observed in the maniçobals of Bahia and Piauí is no longer seen.
However, what is even more revolting is what happens to children, according to information from several people. Certain individuals arrive at the most miserable homes and, after showing interest in the fate of a child, immediately employ him with a salary that is paid to the head of the family; then they take him with them; later, they hand him over to some farmer in exchange for 90 to 100$ for the incredible expenses that had to be incurred for the maintenance of the child; when the unfortunate person enters the service of the new owner, he will have to work for a miserable salary, even suffering deductions for the clothes and goods provided, until he manages to free himself.
The shortage of arms in those areas suggests these infamies, however, and we were unsuspected to affirm it, the @(North) has shown itself to be incapable of progressing with the
[181]
free arm, origin of the material development of @(South of Brazil.)
Excluding @(Juazeiro) and @(Petrolina) where there are some foreigners, mainly Portuguese, until we reach @(capital of Goiás), where the foreign element is already large, the majority being made up of Syrians, we counted 18 foreigners along the entire route, including in this count the French friars settled in the city of @(Porto Nacional). For us, this fact lies in the great backwardness in those places; the progress in @(Brazil), in large part, is due to foreigners and an incomprehensible policy passively allowed by the northerners, created the legend that the @(North) is unsuitable for European immigrants. The exclusion of immigration to the @(North of Brazil) shows rare shyness of view and, disregarding the truly fertile areas that those States have outside the dry zones, we do not see much difference between the climatic conditions of the so-called dry region and @(Tripolitania), now conquered by @(Italy) which seeks to direct a strong flow of emigration there. In order to increase the depopulation of those areas, the government channels almost all the personnel it needs to the nation's armed forces. In this regard, &(Lieutenant LEITÃO DE CARVALHO) published in “Defense Nacional” under the title “The Army Volunteerism” an interesting work where the issue is dealt with in detail.
Of the 200 thousand contos collected annually by the &(Union of the North of Brazil), according to official information cited by &(deputy LUCIANO PEREIRA), only 50 thousand are returned to it in public works, the rest goes to the @(South); now, this inequality allows greater material development of the @(Southern states) constituting centers of activity that attract northerners, looking for work, contributing to increase the depopulation of the #backlands of the northeast.
With more or less water, those populations have lived to this day, fighting with unsurpassed tenacity against all the vicissitudes that ended up creating a fatalistic condition that encompasses everything. We have a very clear impression of the narrative of the horrors of two consecutive years of drought (1899-1900), told to us by an intelligent farmer. Listening to him, one had the impression of being talking to a representative of another, more refined race, due to the phlegm with which he clothed his conversation. It was an unfolding of horrible events, faithfully reported without exaggerated emotion and accompanied by sober gestures in a calm, measured tone of voice. The description of the measures taken to save a few heads of cattle that would, once the scourge had passed, reconstitute the lost wealth, was carried out in a truly moving manner without any change in the narrator's way of telling the story, and so are almost all the inhabitants; the greatest misfortunes confront us head on, almost in a Muslim way. On their own initiative, those inhabitants will be unable to escape the great poverty in which they live, the spirit of initiative is small, and this very spirit is nullified in the face of the isolation in which they lie.
It is necessary to establish communication routes because those that exist are absolutely impractical for the penetration of progress; everything that machines can create cannot be used there, due to the material impossibility of transporting heavy machinery on impassable roads that can only be crossed by small donkeys and mules, the most powerful of which can barely support a weight of more than 100 kilograms. The primitive ox cart, when it exists, only finds a road that is difficult to pass through between the sugarcane fields and the mill: for longer distances, it cannot be used due to the state of the communication routes.
Without this element and without foreign aid, to whose initiative, industriousness and expertise, the entire American continent owes almost all of its progress. Without this support, it will be useless to wait for the miracle of the transformation of the #backlands of the northeast into the much-heralded promised land.
No one has any doubt that, one day, those lands will finally be used, because,
[182]
Even the largest deserts on earth will inevitably be used by man sooner or later: the aim is to transform areas currently unsuitable for major crops into fertile land as soon as possible. In the @(northeast), for example, the enormous potential for cotton cultivation is evident, even without much soil preparation; intensive cotton cultivation would be enough to achieve the miracle everyone desires, but for this to happen, it will be essential to set up easy and cheap communication routes in order to distribute production in a way that can compete with the already numerous competitors. The @(south of Piauí) is in the same conditions with regard to cattle; Inevitably, those large pastures without botflies or ticks, where the possibility of increasing the value of cattle is much greater than in any other part of the country, where farmers have to fight against the decimating sadness and against the insect that devalues the animal's leather, will have their future assured as soon as modern communication routes allow them access. It is a necessity that the public authorities must do their utmost to achieve this, mainly by bringing them immigration and roads. Until now, those regions have been abandoned by the Nation, which has placed itself in a situation of metropolis to colony; this practice has been one of the causes of their backwardness and therefore it is advisable that relations be established under conditions of greater equity, where a sincere feeling of solidarity can exist.
To this end, it is necessary that the Government take a greater interest in the unfortunate dry region, still remembered today by the remains of its compatriots, on the occasion of the naive precatory bands carried out by absent countrymen, in order to beg in almost indifferent means, the small contribution in order to mitigate the misfortunes of thousands of human beings, whose suffering afflicts the majority of Brazilians to a lesser extent, so isolated and distant are they from the rest of their compatriots, the unfortunate #sertanejos of the northeast.
The major epizootics that recently devastated the cattle in the municipality of @(São Raimundo Nonato) were never known to the public authorities, state or federal, or else they did not give due attention to the rare complaints received. The detestable postal service, where the abuses committed repeatedly ended up rendering it useless, is for the first time facing a protest, satisfying to the best of our ability the repeated requests that we have received from many farmers. However, the postal service is handed over to bidders who make a meager profit from it. And why is itinerant education, already outlined there by private initiative, not being increased in those regions?
Other diseases that are certainly preventable, such as anthrax, for which there is a reliable means of prevention, but which is the enzootic that causes the greatest damage throughout the area, could be easily prevented. A truly useful medical service would be established, which, accompanied by a pharmacy and a medical staff, including an ophthalmologist, would travel to different areas and treat countless patients.
The presence of a bacteriologist, who would be responsible for microscopic and laboratory research into human diseases and the entire service of studying prevailing epizootics and enzootics, would be highly beneficial for those inhabitants and for the development of science in Brazil. There is an immense amount to be done in this regard and it does not seem unfeasible to us, since the greatest expenses would be for the first facilities suitable for such a service, the annual cost being perfectly bearable. Medical assistance would be taken care of by the vaccination service and it would be enough to go from village to village to serve the large number of people.
[183]
number of sick people coming from many leagues around, just as happened with us. Doctors coming from the @(Capital of Bahia) already on their own, do this work, but as they do not go beyond the banks of the @(São Francisco) and as medical services and medicines are highly charged, few inhabitants benefit from their presence. In almost the entire area covered, the doctor was unknown: up to the @(Capital of Goiás) inclusive, we found 8 doctors, 1 in @(Juazeiro), 1 in @(Remanso), 1 in @(São Raimundo Nonato) working for the &(Inspectorate), 1 in @(Parnaguá), 1 in @(Porto Nacional) and 3 in @(capital of Goiás), of which 2 belonged to the federal garrison stationed there.
There is clearly a need for the Inspectorate to continue to study the area it oversees in every way possible. The English set up a large scientific centre in the interior of India to research the issues of interest to that region, and the reports published by the Wellcome Tropical Research Laboratories at the Gordon Memorial College Khartoum have aroused the interest of the entire scientific world. The possession of the Philippines by the Americans was accompanied by scientific research carried out on a large scale and published in four admirable periodicals, representing as many scientific sections and edited by the Bureau of Science - Manila, under the title “The Philippine Journal of Science”; “Der Pfanzer, Zeitschrift fuer Land-und Forstwirtschaft in Deutsch-Ostafrika” is an official publication and scientific research in the German African colonies. The Japanese set up a scientific research laboratory in the interior of Formosa, and so on.
In order to study the fauna and flora, the &(Inspectorate of Works against Droughts) could hire specialists, taking all the care to set up a museum to house the collections made, and where the types of new species would be collected, because, in this regard, until today, the @(Brazil), despite hiring good people, has seen the material collected by naturalists paid by it end up in other hands, without any other advantage to it than knowing that the results of the researches paid for by it have been published in a foreign newspaper and that the best of the collection, if not all, has ended up belonging to this or that Museum, also foreign. The question of the “type” specimen is so important that the &(Oberthuer Museum) buys any that is offered to it at a good price.
No one, today, will be able to study and determine all the specimens of Brazilian fauna and flora by themselves; only a specialist will be qualified to do so. Therefore, the Inspectorate would only need to hire traveling naturalists who would deliver the collected material to the department, which would then send it to the most reputable specialists for determination purposes. They would be compensated, but would be obliged to write the results of the research carried out in the publications of the Inspectorate and to return the collection and the types of the species described, with the possibility of retaining the cotypes and duplicates. In September 1913, the Americans celebrated the 1st decade of the Desert Laboratory, founded in 1902 by the Carnegie Institution in Tucson, Arizona. This was yet another argument in favor of the impossibility of attempting any serious undertaking without the assistance of scientific investigations carried out in all departments. Only with the help of scientific research will it be possible to know with certainty what the economic potential of the @(northeast) region is and the means of developing it and exploiting the natural riches that it may possess, placing man in a position to dominate the environment through perfect knowledge of all the direct or indirect factors that exert a close or remote influence on the development of a modern civilization, among populations that for more than 3 centuries have assimilated almost nothing of the great transformations that have taken place throughout the universe and that the minimum portion of use that reaches them of the great forces that carried out the industrial revolution, such as the locomotive, is either completely unknown to them, as in the states of @(Piauí) and @(Goiás), or drags on slowly on alternate days, starting
[184]
from @(Capital of Bahia) and taking at least 33 hours to cover 575 kilometers, most of which were extended in huge tangents, in order to reach @(Juazeiro), the center of the entire @(northeast) area, the already advanced civilization of the coast.
Before concluding, we would like to thank the illustrious Dr. PIRES DO RIO and his assistants for their concern and commitment to making everything easier for us. Among the many people who helped us, we should highlight Colonels APRIGIO DUARTE, mayor of Juazeiro; &(MANUEL ANTUNES DE MACEDO JUNIOR), resident in @(São Raimundo Nonato), &(AURELIANO AUGUSTO DIAS), resident in @(Caracol) @(Piauí), &(O'DONNELL DE ALENCAR), resident in @(Parnaguá), &(Dr. FRANCISCO AYRES DE SILVA), clinician in the city of @(Porto Nacional), &(Major JOÃO BAPTISTA LEAL) farmer in the municipality of @(Duro) @(Goiás), &(Senator ARLINDO GUADIE FLEURY), farmer in @(Goiás), and &(Dr. MANDACARU DE ARAÚJO), Inspector of the Indian Service of @(Goiás), for the warm hospitality with which they welcomed us and the invaluable services rendered, many of which were decisive for the final success of the &(Commission).


Itinerary (descriptive part)


Travel diary


Departure from @(Rio) on March 18, §(1912) on the national packet “Brazil” bound for @(Bahia). The commission was composed of Drs. &(ARTHUR NEIVA) and &(BELISÁRIO PENNA) and the assistants &(OCTAVIO AMARAL) and &(JOSÉ TEIXEIRA) (photographer), Drs. &(JOÃO PEDRO DE ALBUQUERQUE) and &(JOSÉ GOMES DE FARIA), the latter bound for @(Ceará). Three-day trip on an old and uncomfortable packet, without incidents. We arrived at @(S. Salvador) in the morning of §(day 21).
The same aspect of other eras at the landing. A large number of saveiros (boats) guided by blacks competing for customers and others loaded with oranges, bananas and parrots.
There was already a good stretch of dock built, but the steamers did not yet dock there. The lower city, on the part facing the sea, where we disembarked on one of the old stairs of the old dogs, still very neglected and unclean.
Thanks to the kindness of the important firm of MOTTA & SILVA, our large luggage was promptly removed from the ship and graciously stored in a large warehouse at the @(Cais do Ouro). After some years of absence, we noticed some improvements in @(Bahia); widened streets in the lower city, new and modern buildings, general electric traction for all the tram companies and an excellent Otis elevator, which holds a maximum of 16 people, crossing about 70 meters in 28”.
We stayed in Bahia until the morning of the 27th, taking advantage of the days spent in the Capital to stock up on some materials that we were lacking. There we acquired carbide and an excellent portable acetylene lamp, which provided us with invaluable services throughout our long journey.
Departure for @(Juazeiro) at §(27 in the morning), by EF Bahia to S. Francisco.
Arrival at @(Juazeiro) on §(28th afternoon).
Long and tedious journey in cars detestable due to their age, damage and filth, poorly fed in the dives along the way, pompously called hotels.
On the first day we traveled until 1 am to reach @(Santa Luzia), where we were supposed to arrive at 5 pm. There we spent the night in the car we were traveling in, due to lack of accommodation and beds in the only hotel in the place. The reason for the great delay was the lack of pressure in the boilers of the locomotive, old and broken, whose fuel was the firewood collected on the side of the line. Every 2 kilometers, the train stopped to make steam and about three times we stopped to collect firewood, a service to which the 2nd class passengers were invited.
The 2nd day went a little better, because
[185]
there was a change of machine which, even so, stopped several times to stock up on firewood. We arrived at @(Juazeiro) at 6 pm.
The EF Bahia to S. Francisco line crosses four distinct areas of the State according to observations we made in passing;
1st A of the coast - humid, cultivated (main crop is sugarcane), more or less mountainous, cut through by rivers and streams. This zone extends as far as @(Pojuca).
The 2nd zone begins there and extends to @(Aramarí), two stations beyond @(Alagoinhas), a city with 5 to 6,000 inhabitants. It is quite dry, slightly hilly and consists of savannahs identical to those found in the north of @(Minas). Large-scale tobacco farming and cattle raising are carried out. - The 3rd zone is the caatinga; dry, flat, consisting of large plateaus with low, dense vegetation, where thorny plants such as favela and xique-xique predominate. This extends to @(Itumirim), although there is a large patch of higher lands, consisting of the municipality of @(Vila Nova), a city on the banks of the @(Itapicuru) with 6 to 7,000 inhabitants.
The 4th zone, dry, arid, wild and desolate, extends to @(Juazeiro). It is an enormous plateau, covered in stunted vegetation, where cacti predominate. The railway line passes very close to @(Serra do Salitre), rocky and covered only with colossal cacti, resembling hands with enormous fingers, extended to the Sky, imploring divine mercy.
All these cacti are thorny, divided into 4 qualities with the common names of mandacaru de boi, mandacaru de facho, cabeça branca, and cabeça de frade (creeping).
There is no winter in this area; there are only thunderstorms, as the people say.
@(Juazeiro) is completely flat and sandy; the climate is hot and dry. When viewed from a high point, one gets the impression of a new city, because the roofs are all light-colored. Since there is no humidity, the tiles are free of slime, and the winds, carrying large quantities of sand, always leave the tiles sanded. A city of about 6,000 inhabitants, it has a market, a poor municipal building, 2 pharmacies and three doctors. There is also a very poor hospital, with only 12 beds, under the direction of one of the local doctors, &(Dr. EDUARDO DE BRITO).
We saw three operations performed by the aforementioned doctor in this hospital: dilation of an adenitis, removal of ascitic fluid, and ablation of a neoformation in the labia majora. The city gets its water from the São Francisco River, from where it is collected in barrels and taken to the houses on the backs of donkeys. There are no sewage systems. The population is about 6,000 people, and it is very affected by malaria during and after the low water levels of the São Francisco River. Trade in maniçoba and leather. Some shops are regularly supplied. Magnificent grapes, almost as good as the best imported from abroad. However, their cultivation is very limited, and their export to the Capital is insignificant.
Our stay in @(Juazeiro) was 17 days, time spent preparing the troops for the long excursion through the #backlands. During this stay, we treated a large number of patients, one of whom was the only doctor in the area, suffering from malaria. It was 17 days of interesting work.
From there we set off at 10:30 in the morning on §(04/14/1912), crossing the @(São Francisco) to begin the journey set up in @(Petrolina), a city in Pernambuco, bordering @(Juazeiro), and sort of a suburb of the latter, since its much more limited commerce is dependent on @(Juazeiro). A much smaller city, with around 2,000 inhabitants, with the same habits and customs as its sister city in Bahia. Communication between the two cities is carried out throughout the day by means of packet boats (saveiros or catraias) and by a steam tugboat, with the fare being R$200 in 1st class and R$100 in 2nd, per person, and the journey being one kilometer, the width of @(São Francisco) at that point. The animals, numbering 36, were
[186]
transported days before, in a large packet boat (catraia), suitable for this purpose. We were carrying eight comrades.
The troop was only assembled at 1:30 in the afternoon. There were 24 loaded donkeys, 6 riding donkeys and 6 spare donkeys, which were tied together by halters to make it difficult for them to escape. When we mounted and our comrades released the pack donkeys from the stakes so we could set off, it was a disaster, an epic. The pack donkeys ran off in all directions, jumping and kicking, throwing the loads to the ground, breaking the harnesses, and breaking the yokes in an infernal fury. The leader of our troop had bought donkeys, almost all new, from different owners who were not used to each other (not sponsored by each other). Furthermore, they were very rested, having spent more than 10 days in a stable and in an excellent pasture (closed pasture). We had to pick them up one by one, repair the yokes, buy some in Petrolina, as the broken ones were useless, put everything back together, and only at 3 o'clock could we set off again, having covered only 3 kilometers in two hours, repeating the same setbacks on this short journey. We finally camped at 5 o'clock in the afternoon, exhausted, at the place called Coité or Recreio, where we remained until 16 o'clock, making repairs and arranging the loads again.
Then we took the indispensable step of branding the donkeys. They were all branded with the CM (Medical Commission) brand.
The yokes of the north are very different from those used in Minas Gerais. They are much weaker, smaller, and do not have the rawhide covering (talabardão) on the wooden frame, which makes it easier to accommodate the load; they do not have a breastplate or a retranca (a leather strip attached to either side of the back of the yoke, passing through the thighs and under the animal's tail); and they are attached to the animal's back only by a narrow strap and by the tightening placed over the load, which is tightened by the needle.
We took advantage of our forced stay at @(Coité) and prepared the yokes using the Minas Gerais method, adding another silha to them, and placing a chest and a bar. In addition, the yokes were filled with more kapok and the backs were improved. The single-story, shack-like house on the farm had a porch-like veranda running the entire length of it. There we slept on our camp beds and hammocks. During the first night it rained a little and we were woken up by the pigs, goats and bucks that invaded our porch, fighting with us for the right to shelter from the rain.


16-04-1912


We left @(Recreio) at 1:00 p.m. and went to camp 4 leagues away, in the middle of the caatinga in a place called @(Terra Nova), (without inhabitants), where there was a cauldron (natural excavation in a rock), with rainwater stored. That day, we had a repetition of some stampedes by the troops on a smaller scale, which is why we did not make a longer journey. Halfway there, at the farm @(Morrinhos), we noticed the absence of a donkey with bags numbers 3 and 18 (pharmacy supplies). A comrade sent to look for it found it without its load a league back, in the caatinga, and the bags thrown on the ground at another point. We were very happy to find the bags.
Arriving at the landing, a small clearing in a macambiral, we set up the awning and had the donkeys released, tied by their hands and one leg. Even so, the next day, eight were missing, which were found far away, two of them at the starting point (@(Recreio). One was not found. In order to be able to continue the journey on the 18th, we made the donkeys spend the night in the stable.
On the 18th, as the missing donkey had not been found by noon, we decided to suspend the loads and continue the journey, leaving one of the comrades to look for the fugitive.
We walked only three leagues, having left at 2 o'clock in the afternoon, and camped in a place called @(Caldeirão) (without inhabitants), where we spent the night in the open, under a
[187]
covered with juazeiro trees, dispensing with awnings or tents. In these regions there is no problem in sleeping in the open air; generally the dew is not noticeable. So that we would not miss the donkeys, we had them tied by their hind legs, which almost immobilizes them; only then could we leave on the 19th, at 10 ½ in the morning, traveling a distance of 5 leagues to @(Tigre farm), where we arrived at 4 ½ in the afternoon, having passed through @(Barreiros), a group of ten dwellings.
A woman we were talking to there could not tell us whether she was from Pernambuco or Bahia - “I’m from this side” was all she would say. There was a shortage of water along the entire route and the water that did exist was of poor quality. The land was dry and uncultivated. There were a few small farms in the rare places where there were inhabitants.
Despite the shackles and stakes, our donkeys have not yet gotten bored. We had to stay at @(Tigre) for two days because we had lost some of them, who had disappeared into the caatingas. Assuming that they had already gotten bored, we had them released without shackles, but some of them ran away. @(Tigre) is a farm owned by a wealthy man, as farmers with some means are called in these regions. A single-story house, covered with tiles, whitewashed inside and out, with several rooms. In the entrance hall (porch) there are several benches, a table, and rough coat racks on the walls, where harnesses and farming tools are hung. Hooks for hammocks are on the doorways. The water in @(Tigre) comes from a very large reservoir, the best on the route we have taken so far. The farmer gave us information about human and animal diseases, which are discussed in other chapters. Malaria is rampant there after winter. The mad dogs are known as spirited dogs, and there have been cases of deaths from rabies in people. As a treatment, the patient is given a mixture of garlic, salt and urine, and the key to the tabernacle of the nearest church is placed in his mouth. As a prophylactic measure, the animal, which is prone to spiriting itself, is given milk with mercury. Pleurisy in the region is very expensive, i.e., very common. Myiasis is treated with creolin, sweet mercury, and blessings.
At last, on the 22nd, we left, leaving two donkeys missing, and asking the local farmer to look for them and send them to @(São Raimundo). We arrived at 1:20 in the afternoon at @(Lago), a village with 35 to 40 households, belonging to the @(district of Santa Anna), @(municipality of Riacho de Casa Nova), state of @(Bahia). There is a small chapel made of adobe. We camped in the open air. The name of this village comes from a large depression in a ravine, at the side of the road, where some 90 to 100,000 liters of rainwater accumulate. There the pigs cool down, the herds of goats, sheep (small livestock) and the cattle (oxen, horses and donkeys) drink. When we passed, two pigs were stirring up the mud at the bottom. The muddy water was the color of a dark cigar. We were truly shocked when the locals told us that this was the water we had to drink and for all purposes and that it was very good.
Fortunately, we managed to get one of the residents to supply us with water to drink from a private well, the only one that was open at the time. This was less barrera, had the color of a light cigar, and although dark and slightly salty, we drank it with eagerness and pleasure, so thirsty were we. We were consulted by all the residents of the place, and we were impressed by the large number of asthmatics and women suffering from the disease. They complain a lot about the golden-tailed rat, which devastates the plantations and harvests. They say that with the appearance of the rat, coming from @(Cariri), the wall bugs disappeared. Almost as soon as we left @(Lago), we were informed of the existence, two leagues from the village, of an interesting tree (the only one known in the entire region) whose trunk and branches are covered with a thick and enormous thorn. We managed to get one of these thorns, which was almost 20 centimeters long. Continuing to ask about this tree, everywhere, they only mentioned the one in @(Lago), which seemed to be the only specimen in those parts. Minimal cultivation of sugarcane and cereals, only for local consumption, with trade limited to goat leather, which was also very small. Extremely poor population,
[188]
with an almost purely vegetative life, mud houses, tiled roofs, without the slightest comfort, without furniture, they generally sleep in hammocks, or on woven rawhide beds, generally infested with bedbugs and gnats. The large number of asthmatics who come to the clinic is impressive, as well as the women attacked in the humiliation.
We have been informed of always fatal cases of a fever which, from the description of the tabareós, seems very similar to exanthematous typhus.
We left the lake on the morning of April 23, 1912, and after a long journey of 10 leagues (7 to 6 kilometers) through the hinterland, we camped again in Pernambuco, near the village of Cachoeira do Roberto, in a clearing in the caatinga, in the open air. One league from this stop, we left the state of Bahia in a place called Torres, where there is an old farm, like all the ones in this region, made of mud and wattle, with a veranda (living room) and some other rooms, each one more filthy. The house near a lagoon with muddy waters where we camped, in a clearing in the caatinga, has three houses, on the edge of a marsh, which will be completely dry in 2 to 3 months.


24-4-1912


One of us went to the village to give consultations and distribute medicines. The village consists of about 40 houses, most of them uninhabited. There are two shops, with almost no stock. There are some brightly colored pieces of calico, cotton, lighters, a few pieces of ordinary ribbon, a box of castor oil, no cereals, some brown sugar, and in one of them a bag of brown sugar and a bag of coarse cassava flour. In addition to a box of buttons, there were uniforms of officers of the national guard. The civil registry is very incomplete; all deaths are due to natural causes.
We examined a series of asthmatics, another series of victims of the humiliation (no less than 8 women, 2 stuck, many not recently impaled and common patients. The same poverty and squalor of the Lake. Both in Bahia and in Piauí, the measures of capacity used are the cuvado and the vara; and the plate, and the quarta, being that the plate and the quarta are equivalent in Bahia, respectively, to 4 liters and 54 liters, or 16 plates and in Piauí, to 2 liters and 60 liters or 30 plates. The fiduciary currencies are the vintém and the copper (two vintéms); the pataca eight coppers, half a pataca (four coppers) and the stamp (480 rs.). Hunting in these regions is very scarce. So far some quails and small birds. We looked in @(Cachoeira do Roberto) for a newspaper from @(Bahia) or @(Pernambuco), not finding it. In these parts, people don't read; they live completely outside the company of the rest of the world. The thermometer showed 14º today. It's the lowest temperature of the trip so far. We've been sleeping outside with impunity, despite bringing awnings and tents.


24-4-1912


We left late and went camping at a place called @(“Gato”) in the State of @(Pernambuco) 3 kilometers from Piauí and the same distance from Bahia.


25-4-1912
We left “Gato” at 8:20 a.m. and arrived in S. José da Canastra at 12 noon. This village is in the state of Bahia, in the municipality of Remanso, in the middle of the dry zone. According to the information we obtained, during the dry season, only the cacti remain green. The village is located on a plateau on the slope of a low mountain range that extends to Piauí. There is a stream that is cut during this period and the water is used by the population. During the dry season, wells are dug in the bed of the stream. The village is poor; it has two shops, with a small assortment of coarse goods. With difficulty, we managed to obtain 4 chickens and 2 goats for the matutajem or matutajem as they are abbreviated as some corn and a quarter of beans. We stayed there until the 27th in a regular house.
[189]
paved with bricks and covered with tiles. The village has a regular but very poor chapel. Once or twice a year, there is mass. There is a private school that is not very well attended. We saw on the walls some strange drawings of the cult. Diseases: asthma (fainting) in impressive numbers, or heart trouble, entalação (one case), malaria, dyspepsia, absence of leprosy and Chagas disease. Travelers from Lordaço are very exploited there. In the entire region traveled after Petrolina, we did not find milk or dairy products. Cattle are scattered throughout the caatingas and no one bothers to make use of this food; only the ox is caught to kill and to prepare sun-dried meat. Pork is rarely used and there are few pigs on the farms and villages. Those traveling through these parts must leave the centers well stocked with provisions (matalotaje, farnel) or they will run the risk of going hungry. There are no vegetables or greens. Rabies is very widespread and the animal attacked by it is called a spirit animal.


27-4-912


We finally left São José de Canastra and after a journey of three leagues still in the state of Bahia, we entered the territory of Piauí, camping three lakes beyond the border, in the municipality of São João do Piauí, a town called Ponta da Serra, where for the first time in the entire journey on horseback, we felt the praised northern hospitality. They gave us excellent curds for the first time, we had a tablecloth (and a clean one) on the table, china plates and dinner provided by the resident. The house was regular, whitewashed, and the personal cleanliness immediately caught our attention due to the contrast with the squalor of what we left behind. The land here is also less dry, and the vegetation is better looking. The residents say that there are no wallworms here. Diseases: the same as those observed until now.
28-4-1912


Departure at 9:00 a.m. passing through the farms of Floresta, Conquista and Outeiro, where we put down our loads at 1 o'clock for lunch, then leaving at 4 1/2 p.m. and landing at Rosilho at 8:00 p.m., covering a distance of 8 leagues. At all the farms or ranches we passed, we were given milk and curds as much as we wanted. It was the curd cheese harvest. Right after the rains, the cows that had calved are brought to the corrals, and the calves are separated so that the milk can be used to make (as they pronounce the word here) curd cheese. This custom only occurs in Piauí, at least in the area we traveled through. Everything is more or less primitive, even the very picturesque language, discussed in another chapter of this report. They say, for example, a flowering tree (flowering) scarcity (scarcity), with the knife held (held by the handle) steeply for exclusively and many others. The houses are lit at night with wicks soaked in earth wax, or carnauba candles.


29 -4 -1912
Departure from Rosilho at 8 1/2 am and arrival at Salgadinha at 6 pm, a journey of 9 leagues, passing through Barrinha, Cágado and Barro, tiny villages and towns. In Salgadinha, we arrived at the time when the sun sets (6 pm), according to the picturesque expression of the local resident, an old man who has been stuck for over 30 years and owns a genuine Braga flint-fired lazarine.


30-4-912
Guided by the old man from Salgadinha, we marched 6 leagues through the caatingas until we reached the Serra do Piauí, from the top of which a beautiful panorama can be seen, and in the afternoon we camped at a place called St. Anna. There are some rock pits there with an abundance of mocós. We killed some of them, and the pits were visited, finding triatomes and ticks in them. We made a good supply of cottage cheese.


[190]
1-5--912


Departure from St. Anna, a 6-league journey and a ranch in Cavaleiro, passing through Sítio and Passa Bem. Departure from Cavaleiro at 2 and landing in Boa Vista, 3 leagues from São Raimundo, a 6-league journey, passing through the villages of Marisco and Onça. There we lost the barometer, due to the collapse of the porch, where our hammocks had been hung. We were able to take a bath, which we had not done for days due to lack of water for this purpose.


3-5-9012 to 20-5-912.
We finally arrived in São Raimundo Nonato after having visited 69 lakes in 18 days. The definitive date for the beginning of the horseback journey should be April 16, when we left the Recreio or Coité site, 3 kilometers from Petrolina. We were held for two days in Terra Nova, two in Tigre and two in S. João da Canastra, a total of 6 days of stopping and 12 of walking, averaging 5 leagues per day. This stretch served as training for the rest of the journey, which according to the information will be over 400 leagues to Araguari in Minas Gerais — a beautiful prospect! From the sample cloth, we can well assess what awaits us. However, the worst part of the party is the unexpected events in these arid and ungrateful backlands. Fortunately, the morale of the entire entourage is excellent. In São Raimundo Nonato we were warmly welcomed by the dam construction staff who provided us with all the facilities and by the population in general, although we must highlight the MACEDO family, who were generous with their kindness and services, for which we would like to express our sincere thanks.
We have crossed the true caatinga, of which one cannot have an idea without having seen low scrubland (rarely does a tree reach 8 meters) more or less dense, in which there is an exception to the tree, shrub or herbaceous plant that is not covered in thorns, trunks, branches, leaves and often the flower itself; sharp, short thorns, some sharp and painful, others, like those of the favela, sharp like those of the jurema, and others that can even cut the leather clothes of the cowboys, like those of the grove called rompe-gibão; thin, long and painful like those of the chique-chique and those of all cacti in general. There are huge stretches covered with macambira, a bromeliad, whose leaves have edges covered with thorns in all directions; others, like all burrs, covered with thin, sharp and painful thorns. One cannot imagine a more hostile nature. In addition, there is a lack of water in long stretches of 4, 6, 8 and 10 leagues and what is found in certain places, at the end of the abundant winter, as a rule, wells in rivers or streams cut off or collections of the last rains, in depressions of rocks or terrain, of poor quality, covered with algae on a bed of mud. This is the water for men and animals, this is the water that we drank with eagerness, such was the thirst with which we arrived at the landings. We did not find a single river or stream running. All cut off, and some completely dry. The Piauí River itself, although with larger collections, is cut off. Only after the wells are completely dry do the residents dig the wells, almost always in the dry riverbed. For some time, right after the rains and when the riverbed or stream is dry, the water still remains almost at the surface of the sand. We remember well that, when descending the Piauí mountains, after a journey of four leagues, in regions completely devoid of water, and under a scorching sun, we crossed a dry stream. All of us in the group were thirsty. One of our comrades pushed aside a portion of sand with his hands, digging a small well, and immediately collected the water that they eagerly drank.
The basis of the diet is sun-dried meat (beef or goat meat), and coarse cassava flour. Beans, sometimes, rice rarely. Cornmeal is unknown. Vegetables are scarce; pumpkin (gerimum) in the cornfields, absence of vegetables. Little livestock raising.
[191]
Chickens: milk is only used right after the rains to make cottage cheese. Chicken meat, eggs and milk are considered harmful to health and aggravate diseases. Rare is the person who knows what Brazil is. Piauí is one land, Ceará another land, Pernambuco another, and so on with the other states. For these pariahs, the government is a man who rules over us, and they know about the existence of this government because this man orders them to collect tithes (taxes) every year. When asked if these lands (Piauí, Ceará, Pernambuco, etc.) are not connected to each other, constituting a nation or a country, they say they do not understand that. For them, we were gringos, lordaços (foreign nobles). The only flag they know is that of the Divine. Illiteracy is widespread and covers more than 80% of the population. Life is reduced to what concerns small livestock and cattle, the vicissitudes of drought, the prediction of winter and nothing more and, nevertheless, despite the estalecidio, or estacido as it is more commonly pronounced, of the onset of vexation and periodic malaria after winter, a resistant people, with beautiful types of athletic build, robust organization; resigned, stoic, indifferent to death, calm in the face of danger, optimally adapted to the hostile nature of their lands.
The number of flies on the farms and ranches where curd cheese is made is simply fantastic. They enter people's mouths when they speak, and they land or fall in droves into the bowl of milk or curds if they are not covered or are not shaken off quickly enough. We saw bags full of curds hanging from a doorway that were black, covered in several layers of thousands of flies that, when chased away, made the buzzing sound of a colossal swarm of bees. On the farms and ranches, the usual attire for men is a calico shirt and drawers, and for women, a cotton shirt and skirt of the same fabric. In S. José da Canastra, the local leader, a merchant, wore only a calico nightgown. Our convoy (local expression) when we entered S. Raymundo consisted of 2 doctors, an assistant, the photographer, the troop leader, the guide hired in Joazeiro, eight comrades, 23 loaded donkeys, eight riding donkeys and four trainers, i.e., more than enough to replace the runaways or sick, in addition to two dogs, Tupi and Turco.
São Raimundo Nonato is a village of single-story houses built with adobe, paved with bricks, whitewashed, covered with tiles, and without ceilings. There are two long, narrow streets without paving, two squares, and scattered houses without order. Population of 2,000 souls more or less.
A church with banal architecture, a small, very poor market, some commercial houses
with little variety and very expensive. Two public schools, poorly equipped and poorly attended. It is the head of a county. The municipality earns 10 thousand a year. The water is disgusting, brackish, extracted from wells in the stream cut off after winter, and from wells during droughts. The municipal well leaves everything to be desired, both in terms of hygiene and simple cleanliness. It is a pit dug on the bank of the stream, up to the height of its bed, to which one descends, by steps made in the earth itself, to the collected water that is collected with a gourd for the carrier's container. Why not build a well, lined with stone, and covered, and collect the water by means of a pump? It is not worth it, is the answer. The people are already accustomed to this, that it does no harm. There are no sewers, nor are cesspits used for feces. Everyone exonerates themselves in the open air, and the purification is done by the sun. The civil registry is very deficient. The only cause of death verified is: natural death. The town has an English company, exploiting this crop, on a very advanced scale. In 1911, the maniçoba of the municipality generated more than one hundred thousand réis in taxes for the State, with the tax being 15% of the market price. Next comes cattle raising, in third place cereal farming, only for the consumption of the municipality. The livestock, both cattle, horses and goats, are ravaged by diseases, a few years later,
[192]
others less so, and these are: bacterial carbuncle, the fourth fôfo (lameness plague), the troço or torce (chair plague), scabies or scratching plague, sadness, the escancho, glanders, the evil of horn, the sponge, etc.
There was no vaccine available in Manguinhos against anthrax (blackleg), the disease that most decimates cattle in these regions, killing more than 50% of calves annually. The breeders were surprised by our statement that in Minas Gerais and other states there is no loss of even one calf due to this cause, due to the infallible results of the vaccine discovered and prepared in Manguinhos, when applied appropriately. It is regrettable that the representatives of Piauí had not yet considered such a simple measure as the acquisition of the vaccine by the State for distribution to breeders, a measure that would yield incalculable economic results, since, according to reports, the deaths of calves from blackleg annually amount to tens of thousands throughout the state, whose main source of income comes from the cattle industry. We remained in that village until May 20. As soon as we arrived there, we sent the troops to winter camp, in order to rest and recover from the journey, and we set up the portable laboratory, to examine the material collected and what we collected on site, as well as the pharmaceutical material. There were countless consultants and, of great interest, the results obtained.
Among the consultants, we saw a case of persistent Botal sinkhole. Due to a lack of food supplies in the area, one of us went to Remanso, a city in Bahia, on the banks of the São Francisco River, twenty leagues from the village, to acquire what was necessary to continue the journey. The route from São Raimundo to Remanso is still through the caatinga, but on a magnificent road built by the English company for use by cargo vehicles. There was still a small stretch to be built. Remanso, on the left bank of the São Francisco River, is a poorly built commercial city, without sewers or running water. This water is collected in barrels from the São Francisco River; carelessly, and transported to homes on the backs of donkeys. Clear in the summer and very muddy in the winter.
The population is between 5,000 and 6,000 people, and the city is divided into two parts: Remanso, on the riverbank, and Capão, half a kilometer further inland on slightly higher ground. This neighborhood was built in 1906, after a major flood that severely damaged the city. Between the city and the new neighborhood, there is a shallow area that floods during the winter, with water remaining stagnant for two to three months during the dry season. During this time, malaria is rampant. Dried or fresh meat and flour are the staple foods. Ten to twelve cattle are slaughtered daily. There are no vegetables or greens. Commerce is well developed. There are good farmhouses and grocery and hardware stores. In one of them we saw two plows on display. There are several metalworking shops and blacksmith shops. There is a doctor and three pharmacies. Single-story houses in general, with tiled roofs and brick paving. There we captured the Stegomyia calopus and Cellia argyritarsis.
Returning from Remanso, where we had stayed for four days, we met up with our companion 6 leagues from S. Raimundo, at the Tanque farm, who had been there for a few days, collecting study material and fossils, and his stay at the farm had been quite profitable. To our surprise, a carrier (positive) arrived from Tigre bringing the two donkeys that we had left missing in the caatingas of that farm.


21-5-912


After a stay of 17 days, well spent, with studies, collection of materials and observation of patients and animals; rest of the troops and provisions for the long journey, we left S. Raimundo yesterday at 12 1/2 in the afternoon towards Parnaguá. Several important people of the place accompanied us for about a league outside the city, among them the Judge of Law.
[193]
the doctor of the dam committee, &(Colonel RUBEN) (RUBEM) as they say locally), and &(Colonels MANOEL ANTUNES DE MACEDO) and &(JOÃO ANTUNES DE MACEDO), two helpful sons of S. Raimundo, who showered us with affection and provided us with invaluable services. We camped in the afternoon in a place called Lages, a small village of huts and mud huts, 4 leagues from the town. We passed two small settlements of 8 to 10 houses (Fachadão and Caldeirão) and several maniçobeiros' shacks. The stretch we traveled today is less arid. The vegetation is less stunted. The residents are more careful. There are already fruit trees in fenced backyards, and some plastered houses in the interior. Residents, a short distance away, that is, more water, more humidity. The caatinga is less hostile, less dense and less thorny. A large number of barber bugs (T. megistus) were caught inside the houses, while the species found behind them disappeared. A large number of asthmatics, three cases of embarrassment, one of squeezing, and reports of three more. There was no goiter or other manifestations of Chagas disease. There we camped in the open, in a sparse forest of jurema trees, from which we cut the lower branches so as not to be injured by the thorns. We slept under this curtain of thorns, and during the early hours of the morning, we consulted more than 60 people, to whom we distributed medicine. There we were provided with more than 100 specimens of megistus captured in the houses. As in the lake, we were informed that the wall-mounted insect was disappearing, with the invasion, in its place, of the leather-tailed rat. It is interesting that megistus appeared on such a large scale, which we did not find until S. Raimundo, where we only collected specimens of megistus, there was not a single one of the species found from Joazeiro to S. Raimundo.
We have not seen any patients suspected of having Chagas disease. The megistus will be examined in Caracol.


22 -5—912
We left Lages yesterday at 10 a.m. and arrived at Tamanduá at 4:30 p.m., covering a 30-kilometer route in good order. The region is improving, with more developed and lush vegetation and fewer thorny trees in the caatinga, especially the jurema and the mandacarus. The quince tree, which is a bush in the past, is a tree here. Macambiras are very scarce, and there are long stretches of well-regulated forest, especially angicos, with large, straight trunks. It seems like a transition from the caatinga to the agreste. The region is more populated, with the same number of houses being repeated in small stretches. Malaria is everywhere. In Tamanduá, a group of 12 to 15 scattered houses with a population of about 100 inhabitants, we were warmly hosted by Mr. RIBEIRO, a local farmer. We took note of 2 people who had been trapped, one case of embarrassment and 4 asthmatics and many who had been suffering from malaria. We gave Mr. RIBEIRO 7 bottles of quinine hydrochloride and instructions for treating the conditions. T. megistus was abundant.


22-5-912 to 31-5-9012


We left Tamanduá at 9:7/2 a.m., arriving at Caracol at 5 p.m. after a journey of 7 leagues. The journey was pleasant, almost all in the shade of a thicket with a few openings. We passed through several places and a small village (Jurema), telling the residents that we would stay a few days in Caracol, where we would give a consultation.
Caracol is a village over 100 years old, consisting of one street and several scattered houses, with about 50 houses in total, and an estimated population of 400 people. It is located on the slopes of the Serra das Confusões, where the @(Rio Piauí) is born. The residents use water from a large lake, which only dries up in years of exceptional drought. There we were warmly welcomed by &(Colonel AURELIANO AUGUSTO DIAS), who gave us a house and helped us a lot during our stay there. In fact, since
[194]
Upon our entry into the State of @(Piauí), we have seen in the towns and villages how hospitable, helpful and obliging these people are.
We stayed in @(Caracol) for 9 days, because we found it easy to acquire materials for studies and because it was the center of a highly populated region, where patients would go in search of medicines and treatment recommendations. This is what happened, and our stay there was very beneficial for what we had in mind. We set up the laboratory and the pharmacy and worked as Moors for 9 days. There, the disease of horses and mules, torce or troço, was identified, so widespread in the #backlands of @(Piauí) and @(Bahia) with the plague of chairs, because a horse affected by torce was presented to us, and a large abundance of the protozoan that causes plague of chairs was found in its peripheral blood. We collected abundant material and were able to observe several dozen patients with entalação and vexame. We also verified the presence of two cases of Schistosomun mansoni and examined hundreds of megistus captured throughout the route and at the site, and we can confirm that the absence of goiter and other manifestations of Chagas disease in this region is consistent with the absence of the protozoan, which causes the disease, in the intestine of the transmitting insect. The local population was surprised when we caught a cangambá (jaritaca) alive in @(Minas Gerais), such is the foul-smelling liquid it secretes and throws at those who chase it, which is its only weapon of defense. It is impossible to assess what it is.
Furthermore, the stench impregnates clothes and is so repulsive that the only remedy is to strip them off. We captured the animal and kept it for two days. It must be said that of the five people who took part in the feat, only one did not suffer from nausea and vomiting. An emu, which provided us with ample material, was killed by a rifle bullet. There were some cases of tuberculosis, which is known here as the "lean disease" or "sickness disease".


1-6-912
Departure from @(Caracol) at 10 ½ in the morning, accompanied for about a league by some important local people and arrival at @(Peixe village) at 5 o'clock in the afternoon (6 leagues). We are once again in the state of @(Bahia), municipality of @(Remanso), 2 leagues from @(Caracol), and again also in a dry caatinga zone, having ended the less dry area from @(São Raimundo) to @(Caracol). This, according to information, extends to the northeast to the municipality of @(Bom Jesus do Gurguéia).
During the journey we stopped twice, once in Angico (a group of 5 houses) and once at the “Aroeiras” farm. We had 2 people stuck in Angico and a case of exophthalmic goiter in Aroeiras. At the entrance we saw an interesting scene, a family entourage on a long journey. It was made up of a couple and 4 children (aged one, two, four and seven). The three youngest were sitting on the saddles on the back of a donkey, pulled by their mother, while the father walked in front with a bundle on his back, and the father, with his 7-year-old daughter, also on foot. A perfect picture of the ancient pilgrimages of @(Palestine). This family came from @(Maranhão), more than 80 leagues away, and had been traveling for 23 days. Along the way, we found for the first time, in quantity, a tree that is very abundant in the cerrados of Minas Gerais, the tinguí, here called timbó. There and here, its fruit is used to make soap, as we have had the opportunity to observe.
@(Peixe), is a tiny village of six houses, surrounded by small farms (suburbs), with around 400 inhabitants in a 4-league area. The water comes from a very deep lagoon, which rarely dries up (does not leak) according to the local expression. We had to stay there for a day, such was the number of consultants who came to us (around two hundred), among them dozens of people who were stuck and victims of heartbreak.
[195]
two morbid manifestations widely spread in these regions, and which, by the way, the population does not attach great importance to, because they do not kill, and are common illnesses. Both the humiliation and the entalação accompany their victim throughout their life, which often extends to 70 and 80 years of age. The cases of estalecidios (asthmatics) are already decreasing. Throughout the entire route so far, we have seen the second case of goiter in a young woman, resident of the municipality of @(Remanso), in the place called @(Pedra Comprida), 9 leagues from @(Caracol). A 16-year-old girl, of short stature, married for 21 months, with a healthy appearance. At the time we examined her, she had 110 pulses per minute, but in addition to being 8 months pregnant, she had traveled 15 leagues on horseback in a day and a half. She was accompanied by her father and a cousin, an 18-year-old boy, both of short stature.
The father was 1.48m tall, and the boy was 1.46m tall, but well proportioned and of lucid intelligence, the latter having suffered from humiliation since the age of 10. The father of this boy, now deceased, was a sluggard. Everyone said that in @(“Pedra Comprida”), where there are many wall bugs, no one else, except the girl we examined, has a goiter. The barber bug (megistus) is found here in abundance, without parasites, and there is also no Chagas disease. We bought a quarter of an ox (malotagem). Our cook, whom we had hired in @(Juazeiro), abandoned the group. We appointed a comrade, a victim of sluggard, as cook, whom we had hired in @(Caracol). Our comrades do not inspire confidence in us, and we are always fearful of some betrayal, especially now, when we are going to cross a dangerous region of shacks and gangs, unscrupulous people gathered in the #backlands of @(Bahia), @(Pernambuco) and @(Alagoas), bandits accustomed to assaults and murders.


3-6-912


We left @(Peixe) at 9:30 in the morning and arrived at @(Jatobá) at 1:00 in the afternoon, a journey of a little over three leagues. We intended to camp much further on, at Boca da Caatinga, but we were informed that the water there had already dried up and that it would only be found a few leagues ahead of the place called @(Comandante). Based on the information gathered, we decided to modify our itinerary, since according to what had been previously planned, we would run the risk of not finding water on long crossings of 10 and 12 leagues. We therefore camped at @(Jatobá) and continued our journey along another road where there are smaller crossings from water to water. When a pedestrian asked, “When I arrived at such and such a place, is there water?” the common answer was: “As of yesterday, or as of such and such a day, there still was; today I can no longer say for sure.” @(Jatobá) consists of 5 mud-filled houses covered with bark, all belonging to a single family. The water they used when we passed through was rainwater collected in an excavation made in clayey terrain, which should have dried up within two months, forcing the inhabitants to move one league away, where there is a place to dig wells. The animals drink from this excavation and the inhabitants use this water. It was muddy, the color of Havana, horrible. We centrifuged it and found that there was 10 c³ of mud per liter of water. We dissolved a little alum in it, and that way we were able to clear it and deposit the mud at the bottom of the container. The five houses of @(Jatobá) have 37 inhabitants, all related to each other.
Of the couple, the woman is stuck and the man is stunned (asthmatic). Two married daughters suffer from the humiliation. Everyone complains about the housewife (intestinal constipation). From these people we were informed of the existence of goiter in @(Guariba) municipality of @(Bom Jesus da Gurguéia), where it appears here and there, as well as of a case in @(Caraíbas) (municipality of @(Remanso) — @(Bahia). Since @(Caracol) the abundance of conjunctivitis, blepharitis, eye pain, leucomas and other eye diseases has been striking. There are four patients with conjunctivitis. The treatment here is as follows: grind a grain of hunting lead between two stones, mix the powder with lemon juice and pipe tar, and apply this infernal mixture to the eyes.
[196]


4-6-912
We left Jatobá at 9 a.m.; we traveled through seven lakes through the caatinga and terrible roads until we reached Caraíbas Farm, where we arrived at 6 p.m. We passed by some ranches of maniçobeiros, with whom we talked, listening to their stories of enslavement. Hired by a boss, they went to the maniçobal, where they were charged for food at prices 100 and 200% higher than the market prices. Soon, their wages did not cover their expenses, and they became debtors to the boss and his slaves until they could pay off the debt. If they ran away and were caught, they received terrible beatings. If they resisted, they were mercilessly killed. We killed some quails and 2 stinging ducks. We observed 2 cases of entrapment and three cases of humiliation. Existence of megistus and absence of Chagas disease. However, the region is quite suspicious.


5-6-912
We lifted loads at nine o'clock in the morning, and after a walk of five leagues, we put down loads at two o'clock on the shore of a lake, with the expressive name of @(Bebe-mijo), again in the State of @(Piauí). This lake, formed by rainwater, is in a large depression of an extensive floodplain. It is quite large after winter, and after two or three months of summer, it dries up completely.
All the animals from a distance of many leagues come to quench their thirst, and as often happens, these animals, when they drink, also stop drinking. Hence the name given to the lake. When we arrived there, a herd of about 20 wild boars practically justified the name. We intended to camp in the place called Onça, two leagues away, but we were informed in time that the water there had already dried up. Those who travel in these parts after winter need to ask very carefully about the places where there is water for people and animals to avoid the risk of getting thirsty. Wells and lakes dry up quickly due to intense evaporation. Farmers or ranchers who have a well or a pond surround it and at certain times only allow the animals on their property to drink, by group. If any animal appears that is unfamiliar with the drink, it is chased away with a stick (guided by the cowboy). The entrance to the drinking area is called jiqui. Within a month, the lagoon on whose shore we are, another one (Lagoa do Matto) a league further back, and the one in the @ (Caraíbas), where we stayed yesterday, will be dry and the road for 15 leagues will be completely devoid of the precious liquid.


6-6-912
We left at 8:00 a.m. and camped at 3:00 p.m. on the edge of a large reservoir on the Fazenda da Cruz da D. Benedita—a journey of 6 leagues. Fortunately, we crossed the worst region and here we were informed that we would not lack water until Parnaguá. We killed 2 ducks, 10 true pigeons, a socó boi, several mallards and a curicaca. The house on this farm looks like the old farms in @(Minas). A large house with a wide veranda in front. However, it is abandoned and only a cowboy lives there with a small family. On today's journey we passed by the shed of a maniçobeiro, where there were 2 impalaudadas (father and daughter). The poor man showed us a bottle with the following label: "Anti-periodic potion for the cure of all fevers" (signed &(Dr. BARROSO)) which they sold him for a good price as if it were infallible.
He and his daughter drank four spoonfuls each of the drug and nearly died from vomiting and severe diarrhea. The drug smelled of lemon. We suspected it was a herbal tea containing emetic tartar. We passed by the “Volta do Riacho” farm with walls and roof made of bark from the “pau de bark” tree.
[197]
where a large landowner of noble origin was temporarily residing.


7-6-912
We left @(Cruz) at 9 ½ in the morning and after a 24 kilometer journey, we camped in @(Batalha) at 2 ½ in the afternoon, in the open air and on the edge of a reservoir with regular water. For two days we have been lighting fires at night around our beds, because the temperature drops to 13 and 12º at night and we sleep in the open air in very humid places. There are a dozen houses scattered around the reservoir, which forms a swamp of more than a kilometer. We were sought out by all the local residents, looking for remedies for their ailments (malaria, vexame, entrapamento, homemade). In one house was kept the body of a man who had been a victim of malaria. The burial took place in the late afternoon, the body was carried in a hammock and attended by all the local residents amidst singing and noise. It seemed more like a party than a funeral. We slept outside in a clearing in a small forest.


8-6-912
We left @(Batalha) at 10 am, a 5-league journey and camped at 4 ½ pm in @(Ipueira), on the shore of a lake over 2 kilometers long, one of the few that does not limp. As usual, we camped in the open air, setting up only the awning. There are no inhabitants on its shores, and the reason is the intensity and extent of the malaria. We killed a duck, three mallards and 2 scarabs. At 10 pm, we shot dead, in a tree, a long-tailed rat, called “rabudo”,


9-6-912
We left @(Ipueira) at 10 o'clock and camped 4 leagues further on, at @(Baixa da Telhas). We can no longer make any longer marches. The donkeys are almost all trampled, injured and crippled. We will be forced to stay for a long time at @(Parnaguá) to rest them, heal them and feed them properly. We passed through a village @(“Jití”) where we were informed of the existence of two big-breasted women in a nearby place, the old informant telling us that in those parts the big-breasted women are already appearing (they appear here and there). The appearance of the ox makes a great impression in these regions of @(Piauí), as does the taste of the milk. It is thick, fat and tasty.
The Creole cattle, without breed, are large and have smooth, shiny skin, because they are not persecuted by botflies or ticks, which do not exist there. Once the problem of drought and transportation is solved, these regions will be admirably used for the development of livestock farming, with extraordinary advantages over those in the south of the country. The construction of some well-directed railroads will solve the problem of drought more quickly than drilling wells and building dams.


10-6-912
We made a 36-kilometer journey, leaving @(Baixa das Telhas) at 8 ½ in the morning and arriving at @(Ibiraba Lagoon) at 4 in the afternoon. With the exception of @(Bomfim Farm) less than 1/2 league from @(Baixa da Telhas) and about three huts of maniçobeiros a little further on, the region is completely uninhabited. We set up camp on the edge of the lagoon, which is very long and wide, quite deep and of a beautiful appearance, bordered by a large carnaubal forest. During the journey we killed 2 woodpeckers, a curicaca and some hawks. In the lagoon we killed 5 irerês. The animal the photographer was riding loosened and fell twice. It was necessary to let it loose, passing the harness to another animal. The poor animal arrived at the camp at night, having come walking, pulled by a comrade. We caught a large number of anopheline mosquitoes (Cellia argyritarsis) at night. This was the first time we found ticks.


[198]
11-6-912
We arrived at @(Parnaguá) at 3:00 p.m., having left @(Ibiraba) at 10:30 a.m. We were kindly received by &(Colonel O'DONNELL DE ALENCAR), who provided us with a regular house. In @(Parnaguá) we stayed long enough to heal the donkeys, almost all of them injured in the backs by the yokes; and to reinforce them with good pastures. In addition, we needed to examine the study material collected during the trips and to stock up on food, already very scarce, in order to be able to continue. The topography of the town is beautiful, which is situated between an unnamed mountain range and the majestic lake, which gave it its name, which measures two leagues in length by almost one in width, with a maximum depth of four meters, and some islets. The town, founded in 1634, never progressed and is currently in frank decline, with a large number of houses in ruins. It has a little over 100 houses, some whitewashed, many just mud, and only one with glass windows, belonging to Dr. JULIO LUSTOSA, Judge of @(Sta. Filomena), in @(Maranhão). A doctor from Bahia lives there, Dr. NASCIMENTO, who works as a public school teacher, earning R$60,000 a month. There is a very poor market, a public school, a pharmacy, a jail and a superintendent. In order to stock up on food to continue our journey, we had to send a positive test to @(Sta. Rita) @(E. da Bahia), because there was no cereal, sugar, salt, coffee or flour in the town. We did not find any chickens for sale; in the whole town we managed to get a dozen eggs. The abundant water in the lake is unpleasant and brackish. For this reason, the population prefers water from open wells, generally on the shores of the lake. Some people use it for drinking, brought from a buriti palm grove a league away. The people are indolent, as is the case throughout Brazil. You won't see a single garden planted with plants, or vegetables. Fruit trees are very rare. Their diet consists of meat and flour, and sometimes fish and flour. Although the lake is full of fish, fishing is rare. We only caught fish twice during our long stay of 21 days.
&(O'Donnell), an intelligent and cultured man, in addition to his relevant services, provided us with valuable information about the customs of the inhabitants, human and animal diseases. Chagas disease is already well characterized there, but not very widespread, with serious cases of nervous and cardiac manifestations of the disease being rare. For the first time since the beginning of the trip, we found the parasite that causes the disease in three T. megistus nymphs, after hundreds of negative tests. We insisted on testing new insects and no more parasites were found. There are already a considerable number of those with thick necks, and some with clearly visible goiter. We verified some cases of hookworm, many of not recent malaria, a large number of people trapped and victims of humiliation.
The asthma attack is becoming less severe. The temperature has risen considerably since @(Ibiraba). Until then, we had to light bonfires at night, because the temperature dropped to 12º. The minimum in @(Parnaguá) is 18º. Maximum is 32º. The entire region is very backward. There is no notion of relative comfort, not even of cleanliness; illiteracy in more than 80% of the population, general poverty and near misery — and therefore the enslavement of the poor to the few less ignorant individuals who have some resources, without them seeking them.
alleviate the extremely precarious conditions of those under its control. We have seen something similar in the north of the country (Amazonas) and we now justify the painful concept of a notable jurisconsult and eminent politician of the monarchy who, when asked whether the restoration of the monarchy or the institution of a unitary parliamentary republic would not improve the situation in Brazil, responded that he did not believe that this would happen because, he said, for any form of government to move the country forward, we needed to have a people, and what we had “was not a people, but the manure of a people yet to come.”


[199]


From here we sent a messenger to the city of @(Barra), taking telegrams with news from us to their respective families, who on the way back brought from @(Sta. Rita) two loads of essential foodstuffs for us to continue our journey to @(Goiás), where we are informed that resources are even scarcer. In the municipality of @(Parnaguá) there are several maniçobeiros shacks, whose workers mostly live in slavery to the barraquistas. The system of slavery is identical to that of the unfortunate Hevea latex extractors in @(Amazonas). The barraquistas have agents who travel everywhere, enticing the maniçobeiros.
The stallholders also provide these with food, rough clothing and essential utensils at unmentionable prices, without the right to acquire them wherever they want, and they pay them a certain amount per kilo of rubber, no matter how diligent the rubber worker is,
In a short time, he is indebted to the bartender and from then on, he remains enslaved until, by chance, he manages to pay off the debt, or another bartender or someone buys him, paying off said debt. Another system of enslavement: poor boys between the ages of 12 and 16 are lured by farmers, bartender or muleteers with false promises, and hired with the consent of their parents. After some time, a note is presented stating the unfortunate boy's debt, which cannot be paid off. Then a selfless person appears who is willing to pay the boy's debt, by enslaving him to the generous payer. These generous people (bartender, farmers, muleteers, etc.) are always friends of all governments, so nothing happens to them, and the authorities always collude with these traffickings. During our stay in @(Parnaguá), four maniçobeiros fled from a maniçoba to the village, asking for the protection of the local authority against the atrocities of which they were victims. Emissaries from the maniçoba came after them and the four unfortunates were handed over to them by the local authority.
In an ajoujo (two canoes tied together by the sides) we went to @(Ilha do Meio), where we found a huge number of herons, spoonbills and socós. We had the opportunity to see the voracity of the piranhas that the lagoon is rich in. The badly wounded game, or dead when it fell into the lagoon, was devoured in minutes by the voracious fish.
We consider @(Parnaguá) to be the limit of the dry region of our itinerary. We are perfectly informed that, from now on, with the exception of a small stretch before @(Formosa), all the rivers are perennial and flowing. The vegetation is different, much more lush and thriving, and as soon as we cross the @(Rio Preto), we will enter the verdant fields and paths of buriti palms. Our impression of the region we traveled was very painful and our excursion was very difficult and uncomfortable, due to the scarcity or even absence of resources, and the backwardness and ignorance of its inhabitants, although hospitable and of a peaceful and helpful nature. It is a region that, although inhabited for centuries, is still impervious to progress, and its inhabitants live like primitive peoples. They live abandoned by any and all assistance, without roads, police, schools, medical or hygienic care, relying exclusively on their meager resources, defending their lives and property with a blunderbuss, without any kind of protection, knowing of the existence of governments, because they are charged taxes on calves, oxen, horses and donkeys. Victims of the ungrateful climate, the hostile caatinga and diseases such as malaria, the one that most punishes the region at a certain time of the year, and other unknown diseases that are only now being denounced, such as vexation and entalação. Under the name mal de engasgo (choking disease) it is found in chapter XXII, pp. 417-418 of the work Brazil And The Brazilians Portrayed In Historical And Descriptive Sketches by &(DP KIDDER) and &(JC FLETCHER) @(Philadelphia) §(1857), perhaps the first indication of the existence of the disease in @(São Paulo) and @(Goiás).


[200]
And despite all this, a resistant, useful, vigorous breed worthy of better luck. The type of cowboy from the caatingas is a symbol of dexterity, agility, strength and resistance. Dressed in his leather clothing (doublet, breastplate, leggings and boots), a large and heavy hat of the same material, held in place by a chinstrap, leather gloves protecting only the back of his hands, mounted on a thin horse, usually small but trained in fighting, holding a steer (a sturdy wooden pole about two meters long with an iron tip) with his feet placed in rough wooden buckets, he enters the dense caatinga, full of thorns, looking for the ox and finding it, he touches it and surrounds it, sometimes bending down, sometimes quickly dismounting to avoid a headbutt on a branch that does not let him pass, not even close to the animal's neck, climbing back up the saddle like an acrobat, sneaking, placed on the horse's belly, like a feline, through the woven bushes, in a fantastic exercise of agility and endurance it takes the cowboy whole hours to tame the ox ox, in a threshing floor (of course in the caatinga) and finally take it defeated to the corral. He enters the humble dwelling, takes off his leather clothes, eats a frugal meal of sun-dried meat and flour, naturally tells without affectation, the fight of the day, and sleeps peacefully to start again the next day the sport that demands the most skill, composure and agility of all those we know.
There are many victims among them. We found several cowboys with one eye out, others with large scars on their faces and necks. We saw an interesting sport in @(Caracol). Northern horses are generally taught to equipado. Equipado is a gait peculiar to horses from the northern states. It is a special gait, very fast and pleasant. A horse does not equipado, it will only follow the equipador, at a gallop or half canter. Several riders gather on a large esplanade, mounted on good equipador horses and starting from the same point, without galloping but only equipado and reaching the determined goal, they bump into the animals that, with the sudden stop, retreat about two meters, scraping the ground with their hind legs without falling. The animal that falls is rejected. One of us acquired in @(Caracol) a equipador horse on which he traveled more than three hundred leagues. Despite all the vicissitudes, there are inhabitants of the caatingas with a vigorous build, corpulent and robust, especially in Pernambuco and Bahia, where we also saw many white individuals with blond hair and blue eyes.
Along the entire route, except for @(Juazeiro) and @(Remanso), we did not see or hear of a coffee grinder or a sewing machine. Sewing is done only by hand, and the coffee is ground in wooden pestles. We did not see a single stearin candle. The oil lamp, the carnauba candle, the wick soaked in virgin wax and the kerosene lamp, made of tin plate, are used; this is only found in the larger towns @(São Raimundo) and @(Caracol).
It is clear that we are referring to local customs, without any allusion to outsiders and some wealthy and well-travelled residents, as such we consider the employees of the construction of the dam in @(São Raimundo), the English who explore the maniçoba culture, and who as much as possible have plenty of comfort.
It seems to us that if the merchants imported these objects, they would be left with no buyers. It is difficult to break the routine. It would disappear if easy communication with the civilized centers were opened and people from other regions, accustomed to some achievements of civilization, could be located in the region. We did not find Italian or Syrian peddlers, nor any news of such people. There is not a single Portuguese person in the region we traveled. The peddlers are the carriers of civilization in the backlands, through the objects they introduce: mirrors, toothbrushes, clothes brushes, combs, lamps, watches. The peddlers who travel through this region are national and sell only what is common among the inhabitants at exorbitant prices, without any concern for introducing new utensils. Everything is primitive. The farming system, the production of cottage cheese, sugar, and flour, the
[201]
empirical therapy, abuses, superstitions, etc.
They are a people who are still a few centuries behind. It is possible that we have left behind a legend of men who had dealings with the devil. Our acetylene lighting was astonishing. The unfortunates did not understand how contact with the flame of a match could produce light without the presence of a wick. Our kitchen utensils, beds, and suitcases were objects of admiration. The microscope instilled fear. There is a gramophone in the house of Colonel O'Donnell in the village. As soon as the device arrived, the Colonel says, there was astonishment among those people, convinced that there was something of the devil at work there. Later, they got used to it; they accepted the explanation given and today no one is frightened by the gramophone.
There are many people in the #backlands of the @(northeast) who feed on honey, which is very abundant in the caatingas and forests, mixed with flour. On our journey from @(São Raimundo) to @(Remanso), we met several modelers (honey gatherers in the forests), and it was rare to find a stop where we were not offered honey from the different species of bees that abound in the region. We passed by a house between @(“Batalha”) and @(“Fazenda Cruz”), where we saw a half-naked man who had come back from the forest, where he had gone to collect honey. Surrounding us were his wife and four young children, each with a gourd with a little flour in the bottom. At that time (1 p.m.), they were going to have their only meal of the day. We entered the miserable house and noticed that there was no food except a small gourd with cassava flour.
We did not remain inactive in @(Parnaguá). We collected a large amount of material and, during the entire time we were there, we attended to a large number of patients daily, checking for the presence of goiter and other forms of Chagas disease. Among the consultants, two uncles of some dwarfs we had heard about in @(Jití) appeared to us; one had been suffering from vexame for four years and the other was there to inform about the same illness for a brother who cannot hear. They are both short. One is 1.46m tall and the other is 1.45m tall; 50 years old and the other is 42. Both are robust and have normal thyroids. The father is still alive, he is 95 years old and still rides cattle. He is also short, as is the whole family. Marriages are made between relatives. In addition to the two dwarfs, there are very small children from birth. One of the consultants had a two-month-old baby, whom his mother was carrying at her breast and who was no more than one and a half palms long.
Except for one of the dwarfs' sisters, no one else in the family has a thick neck. After hearing this information, we had the dwarfs and their family photographed. We went on excursions outside the village. We went to a farm called Buriti, whose house, made of hardwood beams, has no foundation and is over a hundred years old. It is spacious, with good-sized rooms and large bedrooms, and is well preserved, although almost always uninhabited. It still has some furniture that reveals the wealth of its original inhabitants. In one of the rooms, there are three frames with portraits of the Barons of Parnaguá, Paraim and Santa Filomena. All the equipment of the troop was repaired and the donkeys were healed of their bruises. We found excellent pastures (mangas) of Angola grass, and we bought a good quantity of corn two leagues from the village.


28-6-1912


The messenger we had sent to @(Barra) to send telegrams and to @(Santa Rita) to buy goods finally arrived. We can now continue the trip that was scheduled for July 2. &(Colonel O'DONNELL) informed us that there is no entalação in @(Teresina). He lived there for many years and had never seen or heard of such a disease; that he only came to know about it in the south of the state, where it is an epidemic; that he knows of a case of death due to entalação of an old man who had been entalação for many years, who at a certain time could no longer swallow and died of starvation within eight days. It was the second case of death due to the disease that we have come to know about.
[202]
In our office, we verified 12 cases of entrapment and heard about 15. We verified 10 cases of humiliation and heard about many others. We did not verify a single patient with asthma. There were several cases of goiters, some barely noticeable; a serious case of alteration of the nervous system, one with a slow pulse (54 beats) and one with myxedema.


2-7-1912


We left Parnaguá at 8:40 in the morning and after a 30-kilometer journey, we camped at Angico under a leafy jatobá tree. We were accompanied by Colonel O'DONNEL and his son, Major ELVAS, the superintendent, and the pharmacist URBANO DE ARAÚJO, for half a league from the village. Along the way, we saw several well-defined cases of goiter. We traveled along the left bank of Paraim, the first flowing river since the beginning of the excursion. The inhabitants of its banks say that it is perennial and only flows during exceptionally severe droughts. A donkey with its load disappeared, so we had to stay at Angico until the comrade sent to look for the stray returned. There we found a family of big-headed people, a widow and 10 children. The old woman has a well-developed goiter and says she contracted it in @(Gilbués), as do her older children. The younger ones born in @(Angico) contracted it there. The whole family appears healthy and robust. None of them show symptoms of nervous or circulatory system disorders. Since the tick appeared, the area has become much more humid, with perennial lakes and running rivers, and developed vegetation.
The epic of the donkeys began again. They were cured in @(Parnaguá), rested, gained weight and naturally relaxed.
Since there was no closed field or mango tree in the area, only handcuffs were released into the open. In addition to the one that disappeared the day before, three were missing and one of them had not been found until late. We found a family of stranded people (father, mother and son). The man is 51 years old and has suffered from stranding for 22 years, the mother is 50 years old and has suffered from stranding for 15 years. She is more stranded than her husband, i.e., she has more difficulty swallowing. The 16-year-old son has been stranded since he was 8 years old. They all have normal thyroids and appear healthy.
The couple has another 11-year-old son who is not a squirrel. He has all his utensils separate, because his parents say that the disease is contagious. We killed a howler monkey. The squirrel asked for the hyoid bone (guigó) because he said it was a cure for squirrel. Fortunately, 3 donkeys and the load appeared. There is still one missing.
We were still held back because the muleteer of our troop woke up with a fever, with a temperature of 39.2º. He took a purgative and was injected with a gram of quinine hydrochloride. The missing donkey appeared.


5-7-1912


Fortunately, our muleteer (leader of the troop) woke up feeling feverish, and we were able to leave at 11:30, traveling until late, camping after a 6-league walk at a place called @(Brejinho), where we occupied an uninhabited cowboy's house on the side of the road. We were more sheltered than under the awning. For three days we had had a minimum of 10.5, which with the humidity represents a fairly regular cold. We crossed the @(Paraim), and went along the @(Corrente). The area is not dry. Leafy bushes, no thorns, and plenty of ticks.


6-7-1912


We walked 36 kilometers today, leaving at 9 a.m. and camping at 3 ½ p.m. at @(Sítio), in the municipality of Corrente, a small village with 8 or 10 scattered fires. One league from @(Brejinho) we crossed the Corrente and climbed a small mountain range. From then on, we entered a dry region again. We found water (from a reservoir) at @(Pé de Morro), a farm, at @(Ipueiras), a cowboy's house, (water from a tank) and at @(Sítio) (reservoir). Almost all the residents of Sítio have thyroid hypertrophy, without any
[203]
another manifestation of Chagas disease. We found two cases of embarrassment and one of entrapment. We had a big scare there. One of our assistants, after dinner, had a gastric disturbance with cerebral phenomena. With appropriate medication, he was out of danger that night. As there was no longer an energetic purgative in our ambulance, we gave him the earth purgative pinhão da purga, with excellent results.


7-7-1912


We left Sítio at noon and set up camp at 6:00 p.m. in Perí-Perí, a small village (State of Bahia - Municipality of Santa Rita), covering a distance of only four leagues. We slept outdoors, under the canopy of a fig tree, and the minimum temperature there was 7.5º. Fortunately, we took the precaution of lighting fires. The journey was pleasant because the road went through a forest. We saw several people with small hypertrophies in the thyroid, but who nevertheless appeared healthy and robust, without nervous or cardiac disorders. Old people with small hypertrophies of the thyroid since their youth or childhood, without any increase or alteration in their health. Robust, healthy children with hypertrophied thyroids. Only one child of 9 years old, idiotic and aphasic, since the age of 5, without thyroid hypertrophy, and two women with arrhythmias, one with a normal thyroid. The disease in this region is very benign. There are many wall-worms (megistus). We saw three stuck animals, no cases of embarrassment or asthma. We stayed there for a day to prepare corn for the animals. We killed 3 guans, 8 true pigeons and a large owl. On the 9th we will arrive at @(Formosa), a village in @(Bahia), on the banks of the @(Rio Preto).


9-7-1912


Departure from @(Perí-Perí) at 8:30 in the morning and arrival at @(Formosa) at 1:00 in the afternoon. The distance is 27 kilometers. Easy to write, but difficult to do is to break camp at 8:00 in the morning, when traveling with a large group. The cook has to be woken up at 4:00 to prepare lunch and coffee, and the comrades have to get the donkeys and pack the loads. Lunch is ready for the arrival point. Coffee is taken with biscuits or cottage cheese. The other comrades, some go to look for the donkeys, and others pack the loads, take down the awnings and beds. Fortunately, there is a certain order to everything. When the troops arrived at a camp, the donkeys were not unloaded at random. All our bags were numbered, with each number indicating the contents of the bag. First, the donkey with the bags of laboratory material was unloaded. Once the bags were placed on each side of the donkey, it was taken to another point where its saddle was removed. Another came next with the bags of medicine supplies. The same procedure was followed, and so on with all the others. All the loads were thus in perfect order. The saddles were placed with the sweat pad exposed to the air to evaporate the sweat and dry the pus from the wounds on the back (when the animal was injured). Before being released, the donkeys were tied up when there was no closed pasture (mango) and were scraped, cured and brushed. They went through the same procedure before receiving the loads, having previously been given a good ration of corn. The saddles were scraped and cleaned, the sweat pads were beaten to loosen the stuffing and soften it, and scraped with a corn cob or a piece of rough-skinned wood to remove the dried crusts of pus or sweat with the dust. Woe betide anyone who does not take these precautions. They risk being left on the road without a ride.
Our table was made from four suitcases, over which a leather covering was spread. Our usual food was beans, rice, fresh meat (in the villages), flour; chicken and eggs (when available); coffee and biscuits or cottage cheese. There were countless days when we ate only once a day, i.e., we had coffee with biscuits or cottage cheese.
[204]
before lifting loads, and we ate in the afternoon or evening, after lowering them. The comrades carried flour, brown sugar and cottage cheese in their scrimps (small cloth bags slung over their shoulders). We carried biscuits in our saddlebags. This was especially the case in dry regions where we had long crossings of six, eight, ten or more leagues without water. This was transported in leather or waterproof canvas bags that we equipped ourselves with.
Formosa is a large village, situated on the left bank of the @(Rio Preto), navigable by small steamers, which leave from the city of @(Barra) and go to @(S. Marcello), 9 leagues above Formosa. The @(Rio Preto) is a tributary of the @(Rio Grande), and this of the @(São Francisco). On the bank of the @(Rio Grande) is located the city of @(Santa Rita), head of the county to which @(Formosa) is subordinate. The name of the place is very appropriate.
@(Formosa) was once a place of great commerce for @(Goiás), @(Piauí) and @(Maranhão), but today it is in decline, due to the extension of navigation to @(S. Marcello), where commerce was transferred, as well as due to the tremendous struggle that has been going on for years between two important families of the place, for reasons of political predominance. The contenders reached the greatest excesses, enticing cabroeira (henchmen) and engaging in bloody battles, killing each other, setting fire to houses in the village and farms, devastating plantations, annihilating livestock, and finally committing all sorts of depredations. For these reasons, there was a huge exodus of the population and the village went into frank decline. Even so, it has a population of about 1,000 inhabitants, of healthy appearance and has a good climate, a little hot, but very dry. In the center of the village, there are two wide streets with regular whitewashed houses with tiled roofs, a regular church and a chapel. Some shops with regular stock and places to stay for travelers. In the surroundings, there are only mud-brick houses, generally with tiled roofs. There is an abundance of megistus and the presence of goiter, which is generally very small. Of the 18 goiter sufferers we examined, only one had a pear-shaped goiter. None of these individuals showed any other manifestation of Chagas disease, and they were all robust, fit for work and of normal intelligence. We walked through the entire village and, despite thorough inquiries, we did not come across any cases of idiocy, cretinism, infantilism or other disturbances of the nervous system.
Throughout the region where the disease exists, from @(Parnaguá), it is benign, with rare cases of serious manifestations. We observed two cases of entrapment, and we had news of six more cases. We did not see any patients with vexame. The @(Rio Preto), despite the name given to it due to the color of its bed, has clear and crystalline water, which is slightly blocked. Local trade is carried out with the city of @(Barra) by means of steamers (one trip per month) and by troops, with many people preferring this method, as it is cheaper, safer, and more regular.


11 - 7 - 1912


We left @(Formosa) at 1 pm and camped at 5 ½ pm, in a floodplain, on the banks of the @(Rio Preto), 2 kilometers beyond the @(Váu farm), in the open air.
Route 4 ½ leagues. We passed a house in @(Angico), where a cowboy lives with his wife and five children; all of them have small goiters, contracted, says the cowboy, in @(Duro), where he had moved three years ago. He informed us that he returned from @(Duro) a year ago, and that since then, his children's goiters have been decreasing. He informed us that in @(Duro), the individual without a crop is an exception, and that the number of idiots, aphasics and paralytics is very high. For the first time we heard about caruara, a disease of calves, common in @(Goiás), with symptoms similar to infantile paralysis. We captured three horseflies and some anopheles. The appearance of the region is different. The cacti and jurema have disappeared. We entered the savannah of trees with crooked branches.


12 - 7 - 1912


We left @(Váu) at 8 ½ in the morning and
[205]
At 2 o'clock we arrived at @(S. Marcelo) with a route of 5 leagues. @(S. Marcelo) is a new village (a little over 2 years old) founded after navigation of the @(Rio Preto) was established up to this point.
There used to be a Santa Maria farm marked on the maps. The village prospered thanks to the high prices of caucho and mangabeira rubber, but with the crisis in these products, it is in decline, and discouragement has spread among the businesses and the inhabitants. The village is located on the left bank of the Rio Preto, at the mouth of the Rio Sapão, a tributary of the former, in a pleasant and picturesque location. It has some regular buildings. There we saw the first chalet in our entire excursion. A new building, with floors and lining, regularly furnished, belonging to Mr. José dos Reis, a strong businessman in the area, who was very kind to us during our stay there. At the time we passed by, there was a circus with little horses and a mirabile dictu, a cinematograph with acetylene light. The place has a fixed population of about 400 people and during the mangaba rubber harvests (from September to January) the adventitious population is very large. We saw a person with a large goiter, living in @(Goiás).
In the village, the existence of the barber is denied, which is possible, because almost all the houses are plastered and whitewashed. On the way here, we were informed of the existence of four trapped in the @(Mato Grosso farm) and two in the village. No embarrassment. Having decided to continue to Porto Nacional via Duro, instead of Pedro Afonso, as previously determined, we had to cross the Rio Preto. The cargo crossed in canoes and the animals swam. This task took a long time, so we spent the night there to continue the journey the next day. After crossing the river, we camped on the other side (right bank) in the open air. Fortunately and definitively, the dry zone ended. From @(Formosa) we have crossed several flowing streams, large plateaus of cerrados, lagoons and marshes populated by buriti palms.


13 - 7 - 1912


We left @(S. Marcelo) at 11 a.m., without lunch, and after a journey of 6 leagues, we camped at 6 p.m. in the open air, on the edge of a large marsh, in a place called @(Pouso Alegre), which is uninhabited. Half of the journey was on a dry plateau, where horses and riders were chased by horseflies (Chrysops) in large numbers. We had our only solid meal that day at 9 p.m. For the first time during the excursion, we heard the croaking of frogs and admired the phosphorescence of fireflies in astonishing numbers. We captured three specimens of Sthetomyia. No more juremas, macambiras, or all the thorny vegetation of the dry areas. Now there are meadows, paths of buriti palms, thickets of woodland with slender trees with straight, smooth trunks, and plateaus or cerrado plateaus, with their trees with crooked branches, abundant in them with piqui, cagaita, etc. We had a minimum of 9.5.


14 - 7 - 1912


We traveled 6 leagues from 11 a.m. to 4 p.m., camping in @(Pedra do Fogo), in the open air, near a hut covered with buriti palms, where a family of papudos lives, consisting of a couple and four children. These people do not consider themselves very isolated because they have neighbors 2 and 3 leagues away. Halfway to this resting place, on a plateau, there is a beautiful spring of crystal clear water, probably mineral. The water bubbles violently and in appreciable quantity from a natural well, lined at the bottom and on the walls with irregular white stones, which, either by the reflection of the light, or perhaps by the nature of the salt dissolving in the water, appear bluish, a sky blue on the surface, and a dark blue in the spaces between one stone and another. A stick, any object inserted into the water, the arm of a
[206]
man present the same fluorescence.
We collected two bottles of this water to test in the @(Rio). We captured horseflies and mosquitoes, including a Manguinhosia. We have found some flocks of blue macaws, but they are so wild that we have not yet managed to shoot any. We had a minimum temperature of 9º.


15-7-1912
        
We traveled only 4 leagues, leaving @(Pedra do Fogo) at 9 a.m. and camping at 1 p.m., on a ranch opened on @(the 'Barra dos Veados' farm) owned by an old and winged mulatto from Bahia, a rustic but hospitable and intelligent man. Married, he has strong sons and a young daughter, the only one in the family with a small goiter. Today's entire journey was through the headwaters of marshes and small plateaus in marshy terrain. Four pack donkeys got stuck in a passageway, and this delayed the troop a little, which arrived at the landing at 3 a.m. We caught a Chagasia and killed a partridge. Having been informed that there were sussuaparas, tapirs and scarlet ibises there, we decided to spend a day hunting them. Unfortunately, the result of the hunt was negative. We only killed two more partridges.


17-7-1912
We left @(“Barra dos Veados”) at 7:00 a.m. and arrived at @(“Pinguela”) at 2:00 p.m., traveling 6 leagues on bad, marshy roads. There we crossed the @(Rio Preto) again, at this narrow but very deep point. People and cargo in canoes, the animals swimming. This operation took a long time and that is why we stayed there that day. There are only two inhabitants in the place, the boatman and his wife. This man, when we were talking, alluded to the isolation in which he lives, lamenting the backwardness and lack of resources of the #backlands, had an expression of discouragement and resignation at the same time: “This place is an open grave”. There we captured a large number of interesting horseflies, with the appearance of bees, certainly new to science. In the general areas traveled, the Cellia argyritarsis and albinana disappeared, being replaced by Cellia braziliensis, Manguinhosia and Sthetomyia.


18-7-1912
@(Cabeceiras Velhas). We left @(“Pinguela”) at 9 a.m. and arrived at @(“Cabeceiras Velhas”), one of the sources of the @(Rio Preto), at 3 p.m., a distance of 5 ½ leagues. There are no inhabitants there, but there is a small ranch built by cattle herders, and fortunately for us, it was occupied at the time by two cattle herders who were coming from @(Goiás) to @(São Marcello), and who gave us valuable information about our march the following day. We had to cross a stretch of 8 leagues without water, a plain, 5 leagues on the plateau until reaching @(Serra do Duro), and on the slope of this another three leagues until we found a buriti palm grove in the place called @(Lagoa). We agreed, then, that the troop would leave the following afternoon, when it was cool, to spend the night at the top of the mountain, and that the water would arrive very early the next day and that the horsemen, taking only a load with some buoys and beds, would leave early, to spend the night the same day at the @(“Lagoa”) there waiting for the troop.


19-7-1912
The horsemen set out at 10 a.m., carrying only one load, and arrived at Lagoa at 5 p.m. From the top of the Serra do Duro, already on the border between Bahia and Goiás, one can see one of the most beautiful panoramas imaginable. Mountains, plateaus, and plains in a formidable extension, covering many leagues around. We descended more than 300 meters and made the famous crossing in eight hours. Contrary to our expectations, at midnight that day the troop arrived, which we only expected to see the next morning. Our muleteer preferred to travel part of the night and look for water rather than leave the ship.
[207]
the donkeys in dry pasture all night. We are in Goiás territory


20-7-1912
On that occasion we enjoyed a beautiful and horrible spectacle, of the countryside in flames, over an immense area, by the fire set by our comrades despite strict orders to the contrary previously given. Having made a great effort the day before, we decided to travel only 2 leagues to @(Riacho de Areia), 4 leagues from @(Duro). All these places are uninhabited. From @(São Marcello) we only found inhabitants in @(Pedra do Fogo) (one family), in @(Barra dos Veados) (a large family) and in @(“Pinguela”) (a couple).
The @(“Riacho de Areia”) has a bed of very fine, shifting sand and a very strong water current. It is very risky to cross it at certain times on horseback without first having pedestrians cross it several times, from one side to the other until the sand has settled, and the animal runs the risk of getting buried in the sand if this care is not taken. There are several cases of deaths of people and animals. When we crossed it, there was no such risk, because at that time there is a large movement of troops coming from @(Barreiras), and the sand was more or less settled.


21-7-1912
Departure from @(“Riacho de Areia”) at 7 a.m. and arrival at @(São José do Duro) at 11 a.m., a journey of 4 leagues. @(Duro) is a village in Goiás, located on the slope of the mountain range of the same name, with about 60 houses and a population of about 400 souls. There are some very regular houses. Those in the square and on the three streets that lead there are all whitewashed and of good appearance. Our impression was pleasant. We were warmly received by &(Major JANJÃO), &(JOÃO BAPTISTA LEAL), owner, farmer and businessman, a helpful and somewhat cultured man. He treated us to an excellent lunch at a well-set table and gave us one of the best houses in the village, a two-story house located on the square, belonging to &(Colonel ABÍLIO WOLNEY), State Senator, who was absent at the time. We stayed there for a few days to stock up on supplies and rest the donkeys, who were very weakened by the detestable grass of the plains (the agreste), which the animals only enjoy when it sprouts, right after the fires. Fortunately, we found a sleeve of jaraguá grass or provisional grass there.
One of our assistants, accompanied by a local hunter, spent three days looking for the Susuaparas and Scarlet Ibises, but he found nothing. We are in the midst of the goiter. As is usually the case in regions where it exists, it is not found among the wealthier classes, who live in plastered and whitewashed houses that are not suitable for the habit of the barber, but it is abundant among the poor inhabitants and among the country people.
Almost no one escapes. Serious cases of the disease are already appearing, with cardiac and nervous manifestations, as well as those of myxedema and cretinism. There is an abundance of megistus, one or two sordidus. We did not find any impaled ones, although we captured many anophelines in the vicinity of the town (Chagasia, C. argyrotarsis and albinana). There is a civil registry, but it is as if it did not exist, because rarely are deaths, births or marriages recorded. We verified 2 cases of entrapment, an adult and a child, and we have information about the existence of three more in the vicinity. We did not observe any cases of humiliation. In the house of &(Colonel WOLNEY) lives an 8-year-old boy (mixed race), microcephalic. He is like a monkey in his mannerisms and in the rapid movements of his limbs. He climbs any tree, with the speed and agility of an ape. He plays and talks with other animals, but he does not regulate himself well, he is perverse, and will probably later inhabit an insane asylum. On an excursion we took around the village, accompanied by people from the village, we rested for half an hour in the house of a relatively wealthy farmer. Good sugarcane plantation, mill, still, fields, plantation


[208]
of vegetables and fruits, in short, quite an abundance and a sign of work and initiative, which is very rare in these parts. This farmer has 10 children, all robust, intelligent, but all of them suffer from the crop, without any other manifestation of Chagas disease. The mother of this large offspring, a 50-year-old woman, is also plump, robust and healthy.
The farmhouse is only made of mud and has a barber shop, but its inhabitants are relatively comfortable and well fed. In other nearby dwellings where poverty and discomfort prevail, we found, in addition to the fat-faced, several victims of the various serious forms of the disease: cretins, myxedema sufferers, aphasics and paralytics. On the way we saw a donkey grazing, with its front legs strongly arched with the convexity outwards (genuvalgum), so much so that even standing, the poor thing almost touched the ground with its snout. This is called “torture”. We were informed by our companions that this is common there and throughout the north of the state, and that in order to raise a donkey or mule in these regions, it is essential to separate it from its mother at 4 or 5 months of age and take it to the corral, where it is well fed with corn and cornmeal. The animal that is left loose in the fields inevitably arches its front legs, either outwards or inwards (genuvalgum and genuvarum), which does not happen with horses. When the animal is removed to the caatingas of Bahia, the problem does not appear, and it disappears if it is still in its infancy; donkeys or mules that come young and even less than 2 years old from Bahia or Piauí still bend over. They no longer bend over after 2 years.
The “torture” increases until the animal’s chest hits the ground, becomes unable to move and dies. The sheep and goat are also attacked, but rarely. We photographed the donkey and collected blood for testing. The village of Duro is only 30 years old, but its foundation dates back to the exploration of gold mines, of which we found traces; some of them have been exhausted and others have become so deep that the explorers have given up on exploration. On July 25, two Dominican friars arrived in the village to work on missions. They are both of French origin but have been living in Goiás, one of them is already elderly, over 25 years old, and the other is still young, for about 5 years. The old friar has acquired the local customs, identified with them and says that he would not trade life in the backlands for the civilization of Europe. The young man is a cultured and intelligent man. He gave us valuable information about our itinerary from @(Duro) onwards and about Goian customs. He has already traveled throughout the State of @(Goiás), including the regions inhabited by Indians, and says that goiter is universal throughout the State, as are the other forms of the disease, except among the Indians, among whom he has never observed goiter.
He is the author of the best map of the State of @(Goiás). This friar gave us a letter of recommendation for his brothers of congregation residing in @(Porto Nacional). We decided to divide the entourage to @(Porto Nacional) with one of us leaving first, carrying four loads, two comrades and the guide who accompanied us from Juazeiro, &(Mr. DEOCLECIANO AMORIM), and the other was to follow, two days later, with the rest of the entourage.


29-7-1912


The first group left @(Duro) at 2 ½ in the afternoon and camped 4 leagues away, in the open, on the banks of the @(“Riacho das Gameleiras”), at 6 in the afternoon. There were no inhabitants in the place. When we were preparing dinner, we noticed that there was no salt. Fortunately, the salted sun-dried meat made up for this lack. On the way, a jaó was killed.


30-7-1912
        
Departure from @(Riacho das Gameleiras) at 6 a.m., lunch on the banks of the @(Rio Manoel Alves Grande), a tributary of the @(Tocantins) at 9 ½. Then there was a delay of 2 hours, time needed to cross the loads by canoe, and the animals by swimming. Departure from @(Manoel Alves Grande) at 11 ½ and arrival at the village of @(São Miguel das Almas), at 2 a.m.


[209]


where we remained until 6 o'clock, from where we set off for @(Riacho da Mata), where we arrived at 10 o'clock at night, having covered a total distance of 12 leagues. We camped in the open air. @(Almas) is a larger village than @(Duro) and much older, with houses, however, in ruins, and its small and miserable population in ruins, ravaged by Chagas disease, which has all its serious forms present there. It is pandemonium, and if &(DANTE) had seen anything similar, before writing his immortal Inferno, he would have described in it another of the most impressive and suggestive scenes. Of about a hundred inhabitants of the place, only two apparently healthy individuals, although plump, were the only ones who could provide us with some information.


31-7-1912


We broke camp at 6 a.m., rested and had lunch at the Salobro farm, where we arrived at 12:30 p.m.; from there we left at 4 p.m. and set up camp at 7:30 p.m. at the Açudinho farm, in the municipality of Natividade. The day's journey was 10 leagues. Before reaching the Salobro farm, we passed a small group of three huts inhabited by descendants of caboclos, men, women and children, all affected by Chagas disease. There is a lot of poverty there, deaf-mutes and paralytics; 2nd volume of Souls - The two cowboys living at the Salobro farm and their wives have small goiters, but they are robust. The farmhouse is regular, plastered and its inhabitants eat well. There we rested for a few hours in the shade of gigantic mango trees. Along the entire route, there is an abundance of clear and tasty water from streams, creeks, rivers, marshes and trails. The cattle in these regions leave much to be desired. While in @(Piauí) the cattle are large and have short, smooth and shiny hair, those in @(Goiás) (north) are small, thin and have long, dull hair.


1-8-1912


We left @(“Açudinho”) at 8:30 in the morning and rested at @(“Fazendinha”) at noon; from there we left at 3:30 and at 7:30 we camped in the open air, in the place called @(“Trindade”). Total for the day 9 leagues. At @(“Fazendinha”) we met a group of pilgrims who were heading to their penates back from the @(“Chapada”) village near @(Natividade), where they had gone to a religious festival. There were more than 60 people, including men, women and children from 8 to 12 years old, all mestizos or caboclos; (there was not a single white person), all with large shoulders, and some with voluminous and elaborate faces. These festivals are repeated in the north of @(Goiás) in various places, and at different times during half the year, and during that half year, right after the harvest, they take these people from one place to another in a continuous pilgrimage. In addition to the fetishistic pretext and the fulfillment of promises, sometimes even more absurd, these festivals result in large fairs, where animals, things and everything that can constitute an element of commerce are exchanged and sold, as well as a pretext for unbridled gambling where the naive country folk are miserably exploited by half a dozen sly ones. The only people who don't go to these festivals are the elderly who can't walk long distances and the disabled. We passed by an isolated house on the side of the road where there was only an old stick carrying, surely 80 years old, an 8-year-old boy who was deaf and dumb and idiotic. The other inhabitants, a couple and two children, had left days before for a Divine festival, 15 leagues away.


2-8-1912


We left @(“Trindade”) at 6 o’clock in the morning and headed for @(“Baião” farm) one league away, in order to ask for a guide to put us back on the road as we had taken a wrong turn. Fortunately the owner of the farm &(Major GUILHERMINO DE CASTILHO) was present, intelligent and kind. A friend from the farm guided us to the lost road 1 ½ leagues away.


[210]


Once the road was back, we went to rest on the banks of the @(Rio das Pedras), where we arrived at 1 am.
Then we set off again at 3 ½ and camped at 7 o'clock at @(“Capim Duro”). Day's journey 9 leagues.


3-8-1912
We left @(“Capim Duro”) at 5 ½ in the morning and marched 8 leagues at a fast pace until 12, 10, resting on the edge of a load on @(Landí’s farm). From there we left at 3 in the afternoon, and at 7 ½ after a journey of 4 leagues, we camped in an open ranch in the place called @(“Raposa”). In total for the day 12 leagues, we only passed three dwellings, all of blacks or mestizos, victims of the parasitic thyroid. The population of Goiás in these regions is made up exclusively of blacks and mestizos.


4-8-1912
We finally arrived at @(Porto Nacional) at 5 ½ in the afternoon, after a journey of 10 leagues in two stages: the first of 7 ½ leagues from @(Raposa), where we left at 5:40 in the morning, to @(Sítio Nazareth), where we arrived in 1 hour; and the second of 2 ½ leagues, from @(Nazareth), from where we left at 3 ¼ to @(Porto Nacional). We went straight to the post office, anxious for letters from the family, from whom we had no news, except by telegraph, the last in @(Parnaguá), for four months. There we found 15 letters, the last of which was dated June 4th. It was a treat and a relief. Now we will only have good letters, in @(Goiás) (capital), 180 leagues away.
Our 66-league trip from Duro to Porto Nacional in 6 days caused admiration. This stretch is usually covered by troops in 12 to 15 days. We await the arrival of the 2nd group of our delegation, and after that, we will remain for 10 to 15 days to give the troops a rest and stock up on food. Porto Nacional, formerly Porto Imperial, is an old city, the head of a county, in the north of the state, located on the right bank of the Tocantins River, one of the great tributaries of the Amazon. Until a few years ago, it was the only city in the north of the state until the recent settlement of Pedro Afonso, also on the banks of the Tocantins River and 40 leagues below Porto Nacional, was elevated to the status of city. The town is made up of almost 300 single-story houses, with a few two-story houses and two-story houses of a very regular appearance. Most of them are whitewashed, with some painted in colors. The houses are generally made of tiled roofs and paved with bricks, but many are tiled and lined. The streets are straight and follow a certain alignment. There is no running water, sewage, or public lighting. The population is about 2,000 souls. In the main square, facing the river, stands the beautiful and large Roman-style church building, built by the Dominican friars, but not yet fully completed.
Trade in cattle, leather and cereals. Transactions with the cities of @(Barreiras), in @(Bahia), by means of troops, and with @(Belém do Pará) by barges and canoes of the @(Tocantins River). The barges have a covering of buriti leaves and in @(Pará) are known as “Mineiro”. These take 30 days to go down the river to @(Belém), and take 5 months to go up, passing through a large number of waterfalls.
There are barges that carry 3 tons of goods. We witnessed the arrival of three of these barges and 2 canoe boats loaded with goods from @(Belém). The population flocks to the port in droves to watch the vessels dock. Before docking, the vessels stop on the opposite side of the river, where the sailors take a bath and change their clothes. From there, they bring flags to the barges' poles and bring them to the port, where they make a great racket, and fireworks are set off from the shore. All the flags that adorn the barges were those of Divino.


[211]


We met Colonel JOSUÉ, a local businessman, farmer and capitalist, a helpful horseman who made everything easier for us, providing us with a house, pasture for the animals, and also treating us to excellent dinners. Colonel JOSUÉ owns several buildings in the city and lives in a good, comfortable house. He knows Belém and Rio de Janeiro. To our great surprise, the second group of our entourage arrived at 7 a.m. on the 8th, after we had only been expecting it at 3 or 4 p.m. They left Duro at 2 a.m. on the 1st, and in less than 7 full days, carrying 22 loads and only 5 comrades, they sailed or rolled (a backwoods expression for traveling or traveling) more than 60 leagues (80 for the locals), a unique event in these parts that caused extraordinary astonishment to everyone. The companions landed at the following points:
1st day Bank of the @(“Rio Manoel Alves Grande”) Route of the day 7 leagues
2nd << @(Riacho da Mata) << Route of the day 8 leagues
3rd << @(Alegre) << Day's route 9 ½ leagues
4th << @(Baião) << Route of the day 10 leagues
5th << @(Landí) << Day's route 12 leagues
6th << @(Tabocas) << Day's route 9 ½ leagues
7th << @(Porto Nacional) << Day's route 8 leagues
The same road taken by the first group was followed, with small variations. The orientation skills of certain country folk from the backlands, accustomed to serving as guides for troops and travelers, are admirable. This instinct constitutes a new sense. Among our comrades, there was one who had the specialty of indicating the direction to follow to shorten paths, and this, in places he had never traveled before. Another specialty of this comrade was to track a missing donkey until he found it. He followed the trail of the donkey through the caatingas, the cerrados, the marshes and not once, in the many times he was sent to do this service, did he fail to discover the missing animal, sometimes leagues away. On this trip from @(Duro) to @(Porto Nacional), the troop was accompanied by a guide, an old countryman hired in @(São José do Duro). To shorten the route, at a certain point on the trail, they climbed a mountain that had never been used before, and when the troop arrived, they realized that they had gone wrong. The old guide was embarrassed, saying that this had never happened to him. Irritated by the comments of his knights and comrades, he turned to everyone and shouted imperiously: “Shut up, everyone, let me think about it.” He lowered his head, concentrated for a few minutes, and when he raised it again, he looked around and categorically, without hesitation, extended his arm in a certain direction and said: “We can go, this is the way to go,” and it was.
After an hour, we reached the worn-out road (heavily traveled). The language used by the #sertanejo caipiras to indicate a path is interesting and picturesque. On one occasion, we asked one of them the way to a house off the main road. “You follow this line (narrow path, trail in @(Minas) as soon as it ends, you pass a stream, leave a resident, then break the right hand, enter a plateau, which goes down right there”. Another indication: You go through the plateau in a single line (in a straight line). On the other side there is a path, it borders it until the headwaters, then you intest (look straight ahead (a jatobá tree on the edge of the woods, when you get there, break the right hand, go into a narrow path and in a few moments you come across the house “Pita seu fumo e levar seu caminho” (tell someone to leave).
Other times: “You can’t go wrong: “follow the deep road” On a farm where we stopped, we were consulted by a poor resident from a league away who asked us for medicine for his sick wife. The following information was given: “The woman is angry with the mother of the body (uterus) because she washed the body (took a bath). The thing went up (suspension) and the month didn’t come back. Every moon turns her belly gets swollen (tympanic) and she doesn’t defecate (defecate). She’s already had two purges, one with olive oil and another with pine nuts and a bunch of little pills, - it’s the same. They’ve already advised me to have a blessing, because


[212]


It even seems like something sent (a spell).” Another woman, having been attacked by the malina (sezões) gave birth (miscarried) and after that she did not have another month or any ox. To explain that a house is in the middle of a pasture, they say: “The pasture covered her up”.
A certain country bumpkin, referring to two local magnates, users, said; “F. (one of the users) is merciless, and C. (the other user) follows suit”. I give you what I do not have, to express that he will give you everything he has. And so an infinity of original and picturesque expressions that would fill a thick volume. The &(DR. FRANCISCO AYRES DA SILVA) lives in @(Porto Nacional), a clinical physician, scholar, observer. He gave us excellent information about the local medical constitution. In the city there are numerous papudos and some cases of other forms of Chagas disease, not very widespread due to the nature of the dwellings, which do not lend themselves to the habitat of the barber bug throughout @(Goiás), known as the “percejo” and in some places “gauderio”, by the way found in the mud-brick houses of the surroundings, with the species megistus predominating. In the municipality, however, on the farms, villages and towns, the disease is universal, and there are people suffering from all types of nervous and cardiac diseases. There are some cases of tuberculosis and leprosy. Fortunately, this is not widespread, because the leper in the backlands is an individual who isolates himself from society, and is even violently rejected by it. He is a reprobate who lives in isolation, far from any dwelling, in a hut that no one approaches. The poor live off of handouts that are deposited from a distance. During the low water period of the rivers, malaria is rampant.
The common type of city dweller is not healthy. Men of average height, or below average, thin and pale. Indolent population. Absence of vegetable and greenery plantations in the backyards and rare fruit trees. The @(Tocantins River) is three hundred meters wide and has a considerable volume of water. It is navigated from there to @(Pará) by barges and canoes, and by small steamboats from @(Porto Franco), already in the extreme north of @(Goiás), almost on the border with @(Pará). It could be navigated by steamboats from @(Porto Nacional), if the existing waterfalls to @(Porto Franco) were cleared. In this case, commercial exchange with @(Pará) would be frequent, and not just once a year, as until now, which would greatly benefit this vast, almost uninhabited region with the customs of three centuries ago, inhabited by a race that is cretinized, for the most part, by a cruel, preventable, incapable and useless disease.
In lectures with the intelligent Dominican friars who live here, who travel throughout the state to promote religion, verifying the spread of the terrible disease in the state, incurably sacrificing the intelligence, virility and health of thousands of unfortunate people, they, despite all their beatitude and sanctity, agree that God would do a work of mercy if He called all these unfortunate people to His heavenly mansion. The Dominican friars established in @(Porto Nacional), provide important services to the region and to the populations of @(Goiás), including the forest dwellers, whom they always travel, bringing them the word of God, catechizing them and bringing them to the fold of civilization. Along with religious marriage, they advise civil marriage, and explain that only this legalizes the union. In addition to religious services, they founded a school for girls in the city, run by Dominican nuns, where dozens of poor girls from the municipality of @(Porto Nacional) and other municipalities receive education and instruction. Thanks to them, @(Porto Nacional) and other municipalities receive education and instruction. Thanks to them, @(Porto Nacional) will become in the future a center of civilization in the heart of @(Brazil). It was our intention to leave @(Porto Nacional) for @(Conceição de Araguaia) to hire barges and canoes there to go up the @(Araguaia River) to @(Leopoldina), and from there continue by land to the city of @(Goiás). This was the previously planned itinerary. However, thanks to the valuable information from the friars,
[213]
We changed course and gave up the trip to @(Araguaia), and from there we should go directly to @(Goiás), passing through @(Descoberto), @(Amaro Leite), and @(Pilar), a journey of 160 leagues. The friars informed us that due to the rubber crisis, we would not be able to have troops in @(Conceição); that at the time we were, with the low tide, it would be difficult to hire capable canoeists to go up the @(Araguaia River), and even if we managed to find canoeists or boatmen, we would run the risk of being abandoned by them halfway, in regions absolutely devoid of resources and inhabited only by Indians; and that in the unlikely event that we were not abandoned by the boatmen, we would spend four months going up the river until we reached @(Leopoldina), where we would run the risk of not finding troops to transport us to @(Goiás). Added to this is the circumstance that two of our companions were ill and deeply dejected.
For all these reasons, we made the sensible decision to abandon that itinerary and take another shorter one with fewer risks. We had great difficulty in finding comrades to replace two of those who had accompanied us since @(Juazeiro), and who had left us there. Fortunately, &(Colonel Josué) managed to find one of them and we bought the other from a farmer, paying off a debt owed by the comrade of R$70,000, and he, according to local custom, passed on our property until the debt was paid off. It is quite true that we are stating facts, and that we never considered the happy comrade we hired as our property, who has since regained his freedom. With everything ready, another difficulty loomed before us. The passage of our luggage to the left bank of the river, due to the lack of canoes and canoeists. After @(Juazeiro), we found bread in @(Porto Nacional) and a photographer. It was also the helpful &(Colonel JOSUÉ), assisted by &(Dr. AYRES DA SILVA) &(Dr. Chiquinho), as he is known locally) who removed this difficulty for us, achieving one thing and another.


16-8-1912
We moved the animals and luggage to the left bank of the river. This service was only completed at 6:00 p.m., having begun at 10:00 a.m. We also crossed the river and settled on the other side in an open ranch, where we spent the night.


17-9-1912
We were only able to break camp at 4:30 in the afternoon. It is always like this after a long stop of days at any point. We have to readjust the shoulder straps, adjust the yokes, put in new rope ties, look for strong needles, in short, a thousand little things that take up precious time. We walked only 2 leagues and camped in the open at a place called @(Chué), with three dwellings. We set up the awning under the canopy of a landí, a tree that grows abundantly on the banks of the @(Tocantins).


18-8-1912
Departure from @(Chupé) at 7 am, and camping at 5 pm in the @(village “Brejinho”) in the shade of a majestic gameleira tree. Route 3 leagues.
@(Brejinho) consists of a square with about 30 houses, some covered with tiles, and the others with thatch, or buriti leaves, almost all of them covered with mud. Papudos, cretins, paralytics. There is everything. The presence of the megistus, on the occasion (dry) very scarce. No cases of entrapment, nor of humiliation. We saw a leper. The day was very hot and the night was not cool. We managed to get some corn for the troops.


19-8-1912
We left @(“Brejinho”) at 4 o’clock in the afternoon, and took advantage of the beautiful moonlight, traveling until 9 ½ in the afternoon, camping under a group of landis at the designated place @(“Dois Riachos”), 5 leagues away. It is the burning season, and so, even at night, the air is hot and stuffy.


[214]
We decided, seeing as the donkeys were tired, to travel in the morning and afternoon, resting during the day.


20-8-1912
Departure from @(“Dois Riachos”) at 8 a.m.; rest and lunch on the banks of the @(Pedra de Amolar) stream at 11 a.m. Journey 3 leagues. Departure from @(“Pedra de Amolar”) at 4 p.m. and camping at 8 ½ on the banks of the @(Santo Antônio River), a tributary of the @(Tocantins) 4 ½ leagues away. Total for the day 7 ½ leagues. On the way we killed a king vulture, which provided 18 parasitic flies. We passed only two dwellings, of poor big-eared people. We noticed the absence of forests. Savannahs, plateaus, meadows and only on the banks of streams, creeks and rivers, a wooded shore and in the occasional lowland, a small low copse.


21-8-1912
We broke camp at 8 ½ in the morning. At 1 o'clock we rested and had lunch at the farm @(“Perdizes”), having traveled four and a half leagues by road. The inhabitants of this farm are healthy, do not talk and claim that there are no barnacles there. From @(Santo Antônio) to @(Perdizes), there is no housing. From there we left at 5 in the afternoon and went to camp at @(Água Branca farm_ at 10 at night, with a journey of another 5 leagues. Total for the day 10 leagues.


22-8-1912
We loaded up at 9 o'clock, walked three leagues to @(Fazenda São Bento), where we unloaded our loads at noon for lunch and rest, staying there until 5 o'clock in the afternoon, when we set off again, to @(“Extrema”), 6 leagues further, where we arrived at 11 o'clock. We had dinner at midnight, and shortly after we slept soundly under the canopy of a leafy gameleira tree. Before reaching @(São Bento), we passed by a lagoon quite populated with ducks and mallards. We killed two ducks and mallards. On the farm we killed 2 blue-and-yellow macaws and 1 blue-and-yellow macaw. The region seems richer in game than the one we have crossed so far. In @(São Bento) lives a very intelligent man who gave us information about animal diseases. Between @(Água Branca) and @(São Bento) there is only one inhabited place, @(São José), with three huts, whose inhabitants are fat and some idiots. From @(São Bento) to @(Extrema) there is one dwelling. The region is very uninhabited and despite this we have not yet heard the famous roar of the jaguar. In @(São Bento) a loaded donkey was missing, and a comrade went back to look for it.


23-8-1912
We were held up at @(“Extrema”) waiting for the comrade with the missing donkey. The comrade returned with the missing donkey. The comrade returned at 11 o’clock without having found it. We sent the same comrade again, accompanied by our tracker, both of us going mounted and equipped with a buoy. We killed a toucan and a monkey. This one had filariae in its peritoneum and microfilariae in its blood. We are running out of resources. We are out of meat and beans. The corn has run out in @(São Bento), where in the absence of it, we bought rice in the husk for the animals. The residents of @(Extrema) informed us that we will find resources in @(São José), 3 leagues away. The cowboy from @(Extrema) is from Maranhão, as is his wife. She has a goiter acquired in @(Maranhão), where, she says, goose barnacles are very abundant. There are two lepers in the place.


24-8-1912
Finally, at 1:00 p.m., the comrades returned with the missing cargo, but without the donkey, which was found dead off the road with the cargo on its back, stuck in a swamp. A little after 1:00 a.m., we left and at 6:00 a.m., after a 4-league walk, we camped in the open air, on the “São José” farm. The farmer is an old mestizo with a large family. A large, mud-filled house, closed corrals, barns, sugar mill and still, all very primitive and not very clean, or rather very dirty. The essential thing, however, is that we found
[215]
resources and good will. We bought corn, beans, bacon, two goats, two turkeys and six chickens, a real bounty. Some of the inhabitants there have goiter, without any other manifestation of illness, and some, including the old man, do not even have goiter. We saw two people stuck in the mud who do not have Chagas disease, and we received information about two others.
No cases of humiliation have been reported. They deny the existence of the barber bug, but only because it is known here for only living in poorly maintained houses. We have killed some blue and blue macaws and toucans. We have captured horseflies and very few mosquitoes. At night, with the locals, we went to the woods near a place where tapirs and deer are waiting, while the farmer's son went to another place farther away. We stayed in a hammock, set up in a tall tree, in complete silence, for more than two hours, and saw nothing except a flock of guans, which we could not shoot. The farmer's son, however, was more fortunate and managed to shoot a large tapir. In view of this, we decided to stay there for another day to perform a necropsy on the animal and collect data.


26-8-1912
The tapir was found seriously injured, and after it was dead, it was transported in a small two-wheeled cart pulled by two oxen to our camp, where it was necropsied. It was a large animal, the largest we have ever seen. It provided a large number of ticks, intestinal worms and chiggers. Since we entered Goiás, our main currency for obtaining eggs, chickens, cassava, sweet potatoes, etc. from the inhabitants has been thread carts, needles, pins and fancy objects, such as earrings, bracelets, rings, gold chains, of which there are at least plenty in Rio de Janeiro. With the exception of farmers and some well-traveled individuals, no one attaches importance to money, and relatively large sums of money can be offered for a dozen eggs or a chicken, but they are disdainfully refused. We have seen this on several occasions. We then offered the children and women fancy objects, thread carts, needles and soon we were offered the goods we wanted. The fields are almost always planted half a league away from the houses and sometimes even further away, and the plantations of cassava, corn, vegetables are kept on the field itself in a ranch, bringing home only what is going to be consumed that day.
This was one of the reasons why we were denied everything just for money; the little value of money to these people, and their laziness in going to the fields to get what they wanted. Furthermore, their needs are so limited that they satisfy them with local resources. They weave coarse clothing on primitive looms, they make sandals from the hides of their cattle, and hats and hammocks from the straw of the buriti or carnauba palm. They bargain or exchange goods among themselves.


27-8-1912
We left São José at 9 a.m. and rested on the banks of the Canabrava River at 11 ½, having traveled only two and a half leagues. From there we set off at 3 a.m. for the Tucum farm, but we made a mistake due to lack of a guide, and at 6 a.m., after a three-league march, we camped at the Curralinho farm. In addition to many fat men and some idiots among the inhabitants along the road, we also saw robust people without goiters.


28-8-1912
We left @(Curralinho) at 5 o'clock and traveled 7 leagues to the “Tucum do Libânio” farm, where we camped at noon. That same day we had a one-league error. Fortunately we found corn, which the animals were already missing; we made provisions for four days. The farm is owned by Mr. &(LIBÂNIO DA CONCEIÇÃO), a 70-year-old man from Goiás, born in
[216]
in @(Arroios) and living in @(Tucum) for 40 years. Neither he nor his children have thyroiditis. A daughter-in-law, daughter of @(Porto Nacional), has a small goiter. We were unable to obtain triatomas on the farms, not even with the offer of thread, needles and beads. The inhabitants, however, know the barber and know that he lives in the other houses except the one of the person who informs. Mr. &(LIBÂNIO) gave us interesting information about animal diseases. Among them he told us about a “dozing plague” that killed many horses between 1908 and 1909 and that we heard about for the first time. The horse (and only the horse) affected would get under a tree and doze day and night until he died, without looking for food anymore.


29-8-1912
We left @(“Tucum”) at 9 am, had lunch and rested at noon at the @(“José Manuel”) farm, then left at 3 am to camp at 6 am at the @(“Sussuarana” farm) in the open air. A journey of 6 leagues.


30-8-1912
We left @(Sussuarana) at 7:00 a.m. and after traveling 4 leagues, we rested and had lunch at @(“Pindaíbas”), where there are two houses belonging to natives of @(Vila do Peixe), which we entered. All these fat inhabitants informed us that @(Vila do Peixe) is a big dump. For the first time in @(Goiás) we saw a case of blepharitis, which is very common in the dry region. We left @(Pindaíbas) at 3:00 p.m. and at 6:00 a.m. we camped, after walking three leagues, on the banks of the @(River “Tijuca”). Total for the day 7 leagues. On the way we killed a beautiful specimen of “jaburu moleque”.


31-8-1912
We camped on the banks of the @(Lagoa Grande) at 6:00 p.m., having left Tijuca at 8:00 a.m. We stopped at 11:30 a.m. on the banks of a stream, where we had lunch, and then continued our journey at 3:00 p.m. The day's journey was 6:00 leagues. We passed through @(Tanque), a small village with half a dozen houses, where we were surprised to find a private school that was run at the time by an old mulatto with a double pied bot. There were 8 students enrolled. There are many big-faced people there, and the existence of the barber was not denied. It thundered in the afternoon and threatened heavy rain. We pitched our tents, but it didn't rain. We were chased by mosquitoes all night. We caught a large number of anopheles flies on our dog Tupi at midnight.


1-8-1912
We left @(“Lagoa Grande”) at 7 a.m.; we rested at noon at @(“Vereda do Agostinho”), from there we left at 3 p.m. and at 6 a.m. we camped at @(sítio do “Aleixo”), a total distance of 8 leagues. An intelligent and well-travelled old man lives there, &(JOÃO TAVARES). In exchange for spools of thread and trinkets, we managed to get specimens of megistus and sordidus. We found some corn. We saw a stuck bird there. The disease in this region is known as choking disease. All night long we heard the moans of curassows in the woods near the house. We slept outside, but late at night we retired to the living room of the house to escape the rain that was threatening to fall.


2-8-1912
We left Aleixo at 2:00 p.m., and at 5:30 a.m., having traveled 3:30 leagues, we camped at a cattle ranch in Descoberto, 90 leagues from Goiás. We spent the day there. Descoberto is a run-down village founded in colonial times by gold prospectors. In the surrounding area, you can still see the gravel hills that were once settled. There are just over 60 single-story houses, almost all of them covered with mud, some whitewashed, and almost all of them with tile roofs. The population is about 300 people, with the exception of those who are not affected by thyroiditis. A magnificent hospital for the study of all forms of the disease. We photographed some of the patients.


[217]
The most interesting among them is an unfortunate 25-year-old paralytic who lives buried in a chair made of buriti palm, from which he only leaves to go to bed at night. He is a giant in the torso, with the muscles of an athlete, but with atrophied lower limbs and involuntary contractions of the muscles of the face and arms, a deeply impressive figure. He has been ill since he was 14 days old, when he was attacked by air sickness (convulsions). This unfortunate man has a clear intelligence and begs for mercy to be given medicine that will allow him to move at least “on all fours”.
We have heard of three people getting stuck. There is no shame. We have obtained a large number of Triatoma megistus, which are very abundant there.


4-9-1912
Because three donkeys had gone astray, we were only able to leave @(“Descoberto”) at noon, and after traveling 5 leagues we camped at 6 o’clock at the farm @(“Serra do Campo”). There we captured several T. megistus and one sordidus. We saw one stuck and heard about two.


5-9-1912
We left @(“Serra do Campo”) at 8 in the morning and after a journey of 6 leagues we camped at @(“Veríssimo” farm) at 3 in the afternoon. We bought five quarts of corn. It rained during the night. The owner of the farm, his wife and children, are all fat, without any other manifestations.


6-9-1912
We left @(“Veríssimo”) at 8 a.m., and after a journey of 3 leagues, we rested at 11 a.m. at @(João Correia farm), where we acquired 12 quarts of corn. We set off again at 3 ½ p.m. and at 6 a.m. we camped at @(“Lambari” village) under a leafy fig tree. The total journey was 5 ½ leagues. Our troops were in very poor condition and were holding on to the power of corn. The thyroiditis there is intense and there are large clefts. We photographed some of them.
News of two people trapped. The embarrassment is unknown.


7-9-1912
We left @(Lambari) at 7 ½ in the morning and arrived at @(the village of “Amaro Leite”) at 9 o’clock. We walked only one and a half leagues, and stayed there until 2 o’clock in the afternoon. The village, very run down and in ruins, has 54 houses and a population of fat cats and cretins, living in pitiful conditions of illness and misery. There is a post office there, where we found newspapers from @(Goiás) and @(São Paulo), one of which contained a summary of the great disaster that occurred at @(EF Central) on July 31st. @(Amaro Leite), with its population of fat cats, brought to mind some verses by an intelligent #countryman perpetrated in a village in Goiás, where goiter is also very abundant. They are as follows:
There are chats of all kinds
Round and flat
Long and hanging
There are conversations that almost drag on
In this vast mess.
There are some who have folded
Chats from one side and the other
Smooth and pointed chats,
Until after all
The big-headed man drowns.
We left @(Amaro Leite) at 2 o'clock and camped in the open, on the banks of a small stream called @(Buriti). The day's journey was 5 leagues. When we crossed a stream, at the exit of the camp, several women, completely naked, were taking a bath. They were not at all bothered by our presence and did not hide.


8-9-1912
We left @(Buriti) at 8 in the morning, and after a journey of 3 leagues, we rested on the bank of a stream called “Buriti Pequeno”. From there we left at 3 o'clock and at 7 o'clock we camped on the bank of an uninhabited stream, with a deep cave nearby with good drinking water. We walked


[218]
7 leagues that day. We passed by @(Buriti Grande), a group of 5 houses, whose population is almost entirely made up of idiots and cripples, all with large goiters. A painful sight. We later learned that the place where we camped was called @(“Rebentão”).


10-9-1912
We left @(“Rebentão”) at 8. We traveled three leagues to @(“Rio do Peixe”), where we rested and had lunch, and then left at 4 o’clock for @(“Laginhas”), two leagues further on. The corn had run out, which was a great disaster. Without it we could only make very short journeys. The troops were exhausted and exhausted, and the pastures in the countryside did not feed the animals enough. Corn could only be found at certain resting places. In most of them we could not find the precious grain. Our comrades rightly said that what sustains a donkey on a journey is corn, and a comrade flour and brown sugar.


11-9-1912
At 8 a.m. we set off and at noon we dropped our loads at “Bocaina” for lunch and rest, a journey of four leagues. From there we set off at 3 a.m. and at 6 a.m. we camped in a clearing in the woods on the banks of the “Ouro Fino” stream, where there are four houses, including that of a wealthy farmer (he has a sugar mill). There we fortunately found supplies for ourselves and precious corn for the troops.
We acquired a fat castrated cow, which provided us with excellent meat and bacon, rice, beans, sugar, chickens and eggs, and we stayed there for a day. There is relative abundance in the place and for this reason its small population, despite the goiter, appears healthy, and no serious cases of thyroiditis have been observed. We observed two people who were stuck and were informed of 15 victims of this disease in the surrounding area. None of them suffered from humiliation, a disease unknown in the region. There were some cases of hookworm. In consultation, we heard a 40-year-old woman, mother of 5 children who had married at 10 years of age! She (local expression) had sat on the fourth (gave birth) for the first time at 14 years of age. Since she was 25 years old, she has been angry with the mother of the body (uterus) and since then she has only had miscarriages. He had already drunk internally (by gastric route) and externally (eclysters), a lot of medicine, without results, until he went to a mandigueiro (witch doctor) who advised him to take twice a week a thimbleful of urine from a three-day-old female child, and rub it on his belly with the fat of a male coati. He had difficulty defecating on his feet and had a great swelling in his belly.


13-9-1912
We left @(Ouro Fino) at 7 ½ in the morning, marched 4 leagues on very bad paths of loose stones in a mountain range, and at noon we dropped loads at @(“Córrego dos Almoços”). From there we left at 3 ½ and at 6 we camped at @(“Soberbo”), having traveled 6 ½ leagues that day. At “Córrego dos Almoços” there is a dwelling, where we found a cretin, several big-faced men and a leper, the latter somewhat secluded in a miserable and tiny hut made of buriti palm. At @(“Soberbo”) there are two dwellings, whose inhabitants are all big-faced men, and some cretins.


14-9-1912
We left @(“Soberbo”) at 8:30 in the morning, camping at @(“Canabarro”) at noon, a journey of 3 leagues. There we waited for the troops who arrived at 5:00 a.m. after taking a wrong turn, straying about 2 leagues from the road. For this reason we camped there, having our only meal that day at 9:00 p.m. “Canabarro” is a group of 4 houses, whose inhabitants are all infected with thyroiditis and hookworm, a pity.


15-9-1912
We left “Canabarro” at 11 am and after a journey of 7 leagues


[219]
in an uninhabited region, we camped at 6 o'clock at @(“Tombador”), also uninhabited. A desolate region, where we did not see a single living being, not even seriemas, which we encountered frequently.


16-9-1912
We left @(“Tombador”) at 8 in the morning, and after a journey of 7 leagues interrupted for rest and lunch at @(“Taboão” farm), we camped at @(“Meio da Mata”) at 6 in the afternoon. The name of the place perfectly expresses what it is. We camped in the heart of a leafy forest, which we were told was 20 leagues long and eight wide. It was the first forest we had encountered in @(Goiás). Until then we had only traveled through meadows, trails and cerrados. Since the forest was very wide, the cattlemen gradually cut down an area of about 2 kilometers in the center of it, where grass grew for the animals to graze and made it a regular resting place for travelers. Even then we did not hear the roar of the jaguar.


17-9-1912
We left @(“Meio da Mata”) at 9 a.m., and after traveling 7 leagues, we camped at 6 p.m. at the farm @(“Ponte Alta”), owned by &(Mr. St. ANNA AZEVEDO), a retired Treasury employee, an intelligent man, of some culture and well-traveled, having lived in the capitals of several states and in @(Rio de Janeiro), and who, however, retired to fulfill “his ideal”: to live on this farm and walk barefoot and in shirt sleeves, he told us. The farmhouse is much better than the ones we left behind, because it is plastered, whitewashed and covered with tiles, and from the excellent dinner that its owner offered us, its passage is regular. We obtained from the helpfulness of &(Mr. AZEVEDO) some corn for the troops. On this farm we only saw big-faced men among the comrades, and that’s right, not all of them.


18-9-1912
We left @(Ponte Alta) at 7 ½ in the morning, and after traveling 3 leagues, we rested at noon at @(“Xavier”) (farm). From there we left at 4 o'clock in the afternoon and, taking advantage of the beautiful moonlight, we rolled another six leagues to @(“Secretário”) (stream), where we camped at midnight; we were only three leagues from @(Goiás) (capital) and we would have reached it if we had not lost the road. It had been a month since we left @(Porto Nacional), where there is no telegraph. There we received letters from our families, the last of them dated June 4th. We were sure that letters would be for us in @(Goiás), and hence the anxiety to reach the city, where, in addition, there is a telegraph station, being able to give news of ourselves and receive them from our people as soon as we arrived.


19-9-1912
We left the @(“Secretary”) at 7:30 in the morning, scouts (without the troop), and at 10:00 we entered @(Goiás). It was time. Our mounts were in a state of misery, with their hooves eaten away by the gravel on the roads, tired and pitifully unsteady. We left the animals outside the city and preferred to enter on foot, although our clothes were not very Catholic. In any case, we were less ridiculous like this than riding exhausted animals, in a land where the riders are proud of their well-dressed mounts. We promptly went to the post office, and there we had the pleasure of finding 8 letters from the family, all of which were from 12 days ago. From there we went to the telegraph office. Only then did we go looking for lodging for ourselves and our comrades. We rented a house for them and we stayed at the boarding house of &(Mr. FERNANDES).
We stayed in @(Goiás) until October 2nd. We could no longer continue our journey with the troops, which we had brought from @(Petrolina). Our donkeys had been travelling since April 16th, five months ago, having therefore covered a distance of about 500 leagues.


[220]
They were exhausted, trampled and without hooves. After resting, we tried to sell them and waited for a troop to leave for @(Anhanguera) in order to transport us and our luggage. We settled accounts with our comrades who had been dismissed. Two of them did not want to leave us and declared that they would accompany us to @(Anhanguera), the final point of the journey on horseback. It is only fair to note the loyalty of our comrades, four of whom accompanied us from @(Juazeiro) to @(Goiás). We had to dismiss two men on the way, because they were somewhat turbulent and quarrelsome, and another because he was old and could not stand the journey; none for dishonesty or disrespect. Despite being rustic and illiterate, almost all of them (during the journey we dealt with 12 comrades), they served us with dedication, contributing effectively to the exceptional march that we made. They were the first to get up, usually at 4:30 in the morning, sometimes earlier, and the last to settle down when we arrived at the landings. They made the entire journey on foot, sometimes using trained animals. In terms of endurance, we doubt that there is a breed equal to the #sertanejo of the northeast. Give them sun-dried meat, flour and brown sugar and they will walk, on foot, without fainting, for months on end, through any region.
We needed to rest from the long, tiring journey through an almost deserted region. With a convoy of 35 animals, 24 of which were cargo animals, we completed a journey of 160 leagues in 32 incomplete hours, a journey that land travelers usually take, carrying only 2 or 3 loads, in 45 to 50 days. Our journey is the record for speed between Porto Nacional and Goiás, especially since our troop had already traveled no less than 300 leagues from Petrolina to Porto Nacional. We were fortunate to have acquired the troop in the caatingas of Bahia in Juazeiro and Vila Nova. The people of Goiás admired the size of the donkeys, their strength and endurance, walking 6, 8 and 10 leagues a day, with loads of 120 kilos. The donkeys of the caatinga are much more resistant and vigorous than those of the center and south of Brazil. Like men, they have also adapted to that ungrateful nature and their resistance is in the same relationship with the hostility of the soil. In Porto Nacional we had to exchange two of our donkeys for local ones, as they were unable to continue the journey because their backs were too trampled. The donkeys from Goiás were a striking contrast to the donkeys from Bahia, as they are small and weak. To accompany the troop, they could not be made to carry more than 80 kilos.
The horse, which in the southern states is not used for long journeys due to its low stamina and higher demands on the quality of its food, is just as suitable for these tasks in the north as the donkey. We acquired two excellent riding horses in Piauí, and on them we traveled to Goiás (the capital), walking one of them 350 leagues and the other 300 leagues, both arriving in passable condition. The general appearance of the vast region of about 180 leagues between the latter city and the state capital is no different from the stretch between São José do Duro and Porto Nacional. The same geological constitution, identical panoramas, similar vegetation; extensive plains, vast plateaus of cerrados, large paths of buriti palm groves, small patches of woodland on the banks of rivers, streams and creeks, all of which are very abundant. The same solitude. Along the entire long route, there are only three population centers. - @(Descoberto), @(Amaro Leite) and @(Pilar), extremely decadent, with their populations, entirely made up of blacks and mixed-race people, rendered useless by the terrible scourge that is Chagas disease, none of which affects more than 400 inhabitants. In addition to these camps, there are small villages with half a dozen houses, a few farms and poor shacks scattered along the roadside and along the banks of the streams, whose inhabitants are also, for the most part, poor victims of thyroiditis, hookworm and malaria. In short, loneliness, poverty, universal illiteracy,
[221]
the complete owner of these poor people, morally devastated by obscurantism, abuses and witchcraft, and physically and intellectually by terrible endemic diseases.
The current breed of cattle in this region is useless. It is common to say, and we ourselves have committed this sin, that the people of the backlands are indolent and lacking in initiative. The truth, however, is different. The lack of effort and initiative of these poor people is due to the neglect in which they live, and to the physical and intellectual incapacity resulting from depressing and annihilating diseases, with Chagas disease being the most prevalent among these diseases in these regions. There are also almost no cattle, horses or mules in this region. For days on end, through vast plains, extensive plateaus and trails, we did not see a single specimen of these animals. The few animals that do exist are found near farms and homes, and these are small and of poor quality. The Creole cattle of northern Goiás are in contrast to the similar ones from @(Piauí); the latter are large, bulky, with short, smooth and shiny hair; The Goiano is small, covered in warbles, without grace, and with long, dull fur. The natural forage of the plains, plateaus and trails, the agreste, is weak, with scarce nutritional principles, rich in an astringent substance, probably tannin, and therefore poorly accepted by the animals. As soon as we entered the agreste region, after @(São Marcelo), our donkeys, in the first days of using this forage, rejected the corn ration, which they could not break with their teeth, such was the constriction of the mucous membranes and gums. They finally got used to it, but in a few days they became thin and weak, and it was necessary to triple the corn ration throughout the entire route, through the agreste, to make it to the Capital. As we have already pointed out, in this entire vast region, 180 leagues long and 40 to 50 wide, between the Tocantins and Araguaia rivers, there is only one extensive and wide forest, eight leagues wide, near the Ponte Alta farm, 15 leagues north of the capital. The lands are generally not very fertile. Tobacco only grows on previously fertilized land, and corn only produces one ear of corn, rarely two. During the 32 days of travel, we did not encounter a single troop, a herd of cattle, or an oxcart. The road is always deserted. This is where the small population of this region lives, completely segregated from the rest of the world.
On our long journey, we did not see the proclaimed mineral riches of @(Goiás), with which maps and books fill our memory and imagination. There were traces of gold mining in colonial times in @(Descoberto) and @(Amaro Leite), where there are large stretches of disturbed gravel, an abandoned mine in @(São José do Duro), and nothing more. From what we have observed in our travels through many states of @(Brazil), it seems to us that there is great exaggeration in the enumeration of Brazil's mineral riches. These certainly exist, but they are less abundant than is proclaimed. We possess colossal sources of wealth in the vastness of the unexplored and uninhabited soil, in the prodigious vegetation for the exploitation of wood, vegetable dyes, resins and rubber, and in the incalculable force of the immense waterfalls.
Rich are the @(Southern States) that extract gold, not by digging in the bowels of the earth, but from its surface through the cultivation of coffee and cereals; by planting suitable forage in their pastures and raising abundant livestock, and improving their breed, and spreading primary education in all its corners. This is the wealth of the vast @(Brazil). The intelligent exploitation of the land, its settlement by capable and conscientious men, giving them means of rapid and cheap communication with the consumer centers, instruction and exact notions and practices of prophylaxis of regional diseases, all of which can be avoided by means of rational and continuous assistance, and by wise laws of protection and improvement of the breeds. We know almost all the states of Brazil, and we are sorry to say that, with the exception of the southern states, where the education of the people, transportation, laws protecting agriculture and livestock and related industries are taken care of in some way, almost all the others,
[222]
except for the capitals and some municipalities, these are vast abandoned territories, forgotten by their leaders, with populations vegetating in misery, in obscurantism, left to their own devices, plagued by droughts in @(Central Brazil), and by annihilating diseases, such as malaria in the states of the extreme @(North) and by malaria, hookworm and Chagas disease in the states of @(Maranhão), @(Mato Grosso) and @(North of Minas).
This state of affairs is greatly contributed to by the false information provided by those who travel through these regions, who paint in flowery and imaginative language pictures of intense poetry of bucolic, happy and abundant life. If we were poets, we would write a tragic poem, describing the misery and misfortunes of our unfortunate abandoned backwoodsmen. The poetry of the landscapes and panoramas would be erased by the tragedy, desolation and misery of the unfortunate backwoodsmen, our fellow countrymen. Our children, who learn in school that the simple life of our backwoods is full of poetry and charm, due to the health of its inhabitants, the abundance of the soil and the generosity of nature, would learn that in these regions another hellish scene unfolds, which could only be masterfully described by the immortal &(DANTE).
You will certainly not like the frankness with which we express our impression, but we believe it to be a duty of conscience and patriotism. It is essential to tell the truth, even if it is painful and excruciating, and not to deceive the nation in any way, so that today's youth do not suffer the sad disillusionment we experienced when, through books and novels, we had imagined Central Brazil as a privileged country, with abundant lands, endless forests, gold and diamond deposits, inexhaustible precious stones rolling along its riverbeds, its backlands populated by a strong and fearless race, its fields covered with herds of healthy cattle, a paradise, in short, to which we would gladly take refuge when tired of the exciting and nerve-racking life of the cities. The #backlands, which we know, whether those in the far north or the central ones, or those in @(north of Minas) are pieces of purgatory, as the priests paint them, where sins are purged in life, with no other compensation than the unconsciousness into which the unfortunate person who sinks there falls. @(Goiás) is a regular city, with old buildings, without architecture, with the type of old houses in the cities of the interior of @(Minas).
In any case, it is a city where one can live without much sacrifice, with accommodation for troops, a well-established society, a regular library, a recreational and literary club, and some intellectual life. The city is paved, and the shops are well stocked, some very important with large warehouses of goods, fabrics, shoes, hats and haberdashery. There are many Syrian houses. The transportation of goods is done on a large scale by troops and ox carts to Anhanguera or Araguari, on a good road that is 80 leagues long. In addition to several churches, it has several public buildings and the excellent São Francisco de Paula Asylum, a Dominican association run by Dominican sisters where many unfortunate people are sheltered, most of them idiots who have suffered from Chagas disease.
The population of the city itself, whose dwellings are not suitable for the habitat of the barber bug, because they are plastered, whitewashed, lined and floored, and in addition their inhabitants are well fed and already fit for the requirements of hygiene precepts, appear to be healthy, the children are healthy and playful. In the suburbs, however, where poverty lives, and only barred dwellings are still permitted, there are many cases of goiter and serious manifestations of Chagas disease, where the barber bug (megistus) is found.
The @(São Francisco de Paula Asylum), a privately-run charity institution, a new, large and well-built building, is a breeding ground for unfortunate people of both sexes and all ages, almost all of whom are victims of the most serious forms of Chagas disease.


[223]
It is not known what to admire more: the misfortune of the unfortunate, or the evangelical patience of the worthy nuns who run the charitable institution.


28-8-1912
We were finally able to hire a driver to transport us and our luggage to @(Anhanguera) on §(September 30). We managed to negotiate our donkeys and all the troop's accessories. On §(September 30) we left @(Goiás), still having 80 leagues on horseback ahead of us until we reached the @(Railway in Anhanguera). We made this journey in twenty days, arriving at @(Anhanguera) on §(October 19). The southern region of Goiás is very different from the one we crossed from the north to the capital. A magnificent road, well maintained, much used by troops, ox carts and horsemen, this road, at a relatively modest cost - perhaps two hundred thousand - could be transformed into an excellent road for cargo and passenger cars, with incalculable advantages for the entire region of Goiás. The journey we made in 20 days could be comfortably completed in three days. Goods transported in ox carts, which take 25, 30 or more days to travel, would be transported in five or fewer days. It seems to us that a company that leased this industry in that region would receive ample compensation for the capital invested in it.
The entire road is very populated, and at every step you come across farms and ranches along its banks, well-populated fields of regular cattle, with the zebu standing out among the oxen. The road passes through several cities and towns, where you can find relative comfort. In this region we did not use tents or awnings. We always slept in inns, inns and cattle ranches. The cities and towns we passed through were Curralinho, Campina, Bela Vista, Caldas Novas and Paracamjuba. All the inns, lodges and farms where we settled were owned by miners (children of the State of Minas Gerais, or descendants of miners, from the Minas Gerais Triangle, or from the northwest of the State (Bagagem and Paracatú). It is a region almost exclusively cleared and inhabited by miners. We crossed the Mato Grosso, a very fertile forest, which, according to what we were told, extends for more than 100 leagues, extending through the State of Mato Grosso, which gave it its name, and is more than 20 leagues wide. There the lands are very fertile and their price is already quite high. Throughout the region there are goiter sufferers, although their numbers are relatively small, and the number of patients with the most serious forms of the disease is even smaller.
This region already has some comfort; the houses on the farms and ranches are almost all whitewashed, relatively comfortable, and the inhabitants' walks are quite regular. There is already an abundance of cereals, vegetables and greens, cultivated backyards, orchards and less illiteracy. Cow's milk is already used for food and for making cheese. Chicken and pig farming is quite extensive, and consequently an abundance of eggs, pork and bacon. The marshes near the houses have been cultivated and drained; malaria is not so frequent, and in addition to the rational use of quinine salts, which is already common among the inhabitants. There is already a balance between whites and mestizos in this region. Finally, the region (South of the State) that we traveled through, largely inhabited by wise people, for the most part, with developed crops, fields populated by good livestock, regular houses with relative comfort, offers a great contrast with the northern region of the State.
We arrived at @(Anhanguera) on §(October 19) in the late afternoon, and for the second time in 7 months we heard the whistle of a locomotive. On §(October 20) we left for @(Araguari), a city in Minas Gerais, entering Minas Gerais territory a few kilometers beyond @(Anhanguera), as soon as we crossed the large metal bridge over the @(Paranaíba River). From @(Araguari)


[224]
we left on the 22nd for @(Uberaba), on the 23rd for @(Ribeirão Preto) @(São Paulo) on the 24th for @(Capital Paulista), that same day, at night, for @(Capital Federal), where we arrived on the 25th in the morning;
We comfortably covered extensive regions of the states of @(Minas), @(São Paulo), and @(Rio) in four days, representing more than ⅔ of the route we painfully covered in more than 7 months through the states of @(Bahia), @(Pernambuco), @(Piauí) and @(Goiás).
Our mission was happily completed, with all the members of the commission being saved.


Print 1
	1
	Macambiras -- one of the most typical bromeliads of the dry region, the rhizomes serve as food for humans and livestock
	2
	Thorny umburana, beginning of defoliation. - @(Parnaguá) - @(Piauí)
	3
	Friar's head - Rock cactus of the genus Echinocactus, used for various purposes. @(Parnaguá) - @(Piauí).
	4
	Gameleira (Urostigma gardnerianum) gigantic specimen, the largest plant along the entire route - @(Parnaguá) - @(Piauí).
	

Print 2
	5
	Garden - Cactus cultivation - @(Juazeiro) - @(Bahia)
	6
	Flowerbed with cacti from the dry zone - prepared by Mr. A. Löfgren. There are species not yet described, such as Cereus albirama LOEF, which stands out in the foreground. @(Juazeiro) - @(Bahia)
	7
	General view of the cactus flowerbed at the @(Agricultural Garden) of @(Juazeiro) - @(Bahia)
	8
	Quince tree. A plant of the Croton genus, very common from @(Juazeiro) to the vicinity of @(Parnaguá). The photograph taken in full green shows the plant completely lush. In the harshest drought the bush is reduced to just the trunk and branches.
	

Print 3
	9
	Barauna - @(San Jose) - @(Bahia)
	10
	"Cassia" pasture-killer - Previous shot - @(Tigre) - @(Pernambuco)
	11
	An exceptionally large specimen of jatobá for those regions, as those found on the banks of rivers are usually less developed than in the southern regions of the country. - @(Caracol) - @(Piauí).
	12
	Maria mole or cana fistula - common names for Cassia ferrugínea SCHRAD. whose flowers and roots are used by the locals to cure malaria. - @(S. Raimundo) - @(Piauí)
	

Print 4
	13
	Umbuzeiro or more commonly Imbuzeiro (Spondias tuberosa de Arruda Camara)
	14
	Faveleira branch, the plant that most characterizes the caatinga region
	15
	The faveleira (Pachystroma acanthophylia) is a scientific name that we found in one of Mr. A. Loefgren's publications. We assume that the scientific description had not been made public. The imbuzeiro and the faveleira are mentioned at every step by the brilliant and unlucky Euclides da Cunha in his memorable book "Os Sertões". @(S. Raimundo) - @(Piauí).
	16
	Tamboril - tree used in the construction of canoes - @(Parnaguá) - @(Piauí)
	

Print 5
	17
	Carahibeira - One of the most consicuous trees in certain regions of Bahia and Piauí, and found in more humid places, although in a region affected by drought. Photograph taken at the "Bebe-mijo" lagoon near the borders of @(Piauí) and @(Bahia).
	18
	Mandacaru de boi; the largest Cereus in the northeast region and in the entire country. @(Caracol). - @(Piauí)
	19
	Palma or palmatoria, a common name that should include several species of the genus Opuntia, widespread in the dry region. @(S. Raimundo). - @(Piauí).
	20
	Joazeiro (Zisyphus Joazeiro MART.) The most beautiful plant in the dry zone, lending itself magnificently to afforestation. @(Caracol). - @(Piauí).
	21
	Purga pine nut (latropha curcas L.). Widely used in local therapy. @(Peixe) - @(Bahia)
	

Print 6
	22
	Carnauba tree - an extremely decorative palm tree, used in all its parts by the locals. A large carnauba palm tree is becoming increasingly rare due to the devastation caused by the inhabitants. At the time of our visit, the @(Ibiraba lagoon) @(Piauí) still boasted a magnificent carnauba palm tree. @(Fazenda da Cruz). - @(Piauí).
	23
	Xique-xique - common name, probably designating more than one species of the genus Pilocereus. A very common cactus that gave rise to the name of a city in Bahia on the banks of the @(São Francisco). Although the word is indigenous, it is not Tupi, but belongs to one of the tribes that spoke differently and were primitive rulers of those areas, and whose existence is still revealed to us by another word that resisted the Lusitanian and Tupi domination of the conquerors of those areas. @(Fazenda da Cruz), - Piauí.
	24
	Campina - name of the plateaus in @(Goiás). In general the vegetation is shrubby and sub-shrubby. The photograph shows a meadow on the plateau of @(Serra Duro) - @(Goiás)
	25
	Buritizal. Group of plants gathered in places where there is always water and named after the most conspicuous plant, the buriti palm tree. @(Goiás).
	

Print 7
	26
	Camp in the middle of the only forest found on a route of approximately 4 thousand kilometers. @(Goiás)
	27
	Telephotograph of @(Petrolina) @(Pernambuco) taken from @(Fogo Island).
	28
	Telephotography of @(Juazeiro), taken from @(Fogo Island).
	29
	Fazenda do @(Tigre) - @(Pernambuco). The modest dwelling is considered a large house in those parts and probably for this reason, houses of this type are extremely rare there.
	

Print 8
	30
	@(S. Raimundo Nonato) - @(Piauí). Square and its main streets.
	31
	Police jail and headquarters. Fairs are held here on Saturdays. @(S. Raimundo) - @(Piauí).
	32
	Main street of @(São José da Canastra) - a small village in the backlands of Bahia, 100 kilometers from @(Remanso)
	33
	School maintained by private initiative in @(S. Raimundo Nonato) - @(Piauí)
	

Print 9
	34
	Section of a street in @(Caracol) - @(Piauí), where you can see a whitewashed house, demonstrating architectural pretensions, concerns that are completely non-existent there. The common type of housing is what you see nearby.
	35
	Interior of a wealthy farmer's home. Main room of the house. See fig. 29 - @(Pernambuco)
	36
	Main street of @(Caracol) - South of @(Piauí). The town has existed for over a century.
	37
	One of the best farmhouses on the entire route. @(Fazenda da Cruz.) Municipality of @(Parnaguá).
	

Print 10
	38
	@(Largo da Matriz) - @(Main square) of @(Vila de Parnaguá), already elevated to this category in 1634. The town is about 80 kilometers from @(Santa Rita do Rio Preto) and has river navigation using steam.
	39
	@(Port of Parnaguá), on the shore of the lagoon of the same name.
	40
	@(Formosa) - Municipality of @(Santa Rita do Rio Preto) - @(Bahia). Main street showing traces of the damage caused during the fights between 2 local chiefs.
	41
	Another street in @(Formosa) referred to in figure 40.
	

Print 11
	42
	@(Vila do Duro) - North of @(Goiás). Main square where you can see a 2-storey house and one of the rare ones found along the entire route.
	43
	Village of @(S. Marcelo), terminal point of river navigation of @(Rio Preto). It is on the banks of this river and at the confluence of @(Rio Sapão). Departure point for production from the general regions of Piauí, Bahia, Goiás and also from towns in the south of @(Maranhão).
	44
	Temple built by Dominican friars in @(Porto Nacional) on the right bank of the @(Tocantins). - @(Northern Goiás)
	45
	@(Vila do Duro), other side of the square referred to in fig. 42.
	

Print 12
	46
	@(St. Vincent de Paul Asylum) - run by Dominican nuns. @(Capital of Goiás)
	47
	@(Largo do Chafariz) - main square of the @(capital of Goiás)
	48
	@(Palace Square) - Capital of @(Goiás)
	49
	Fountain of the carioca that gave its name to the most important place in @(Capital of Goiás)
	

Print 13
	50
	Vessel called packet and that sails the @(São Francisco River) between @(Juazeiro) @(Bahia) and @(Petrolina) @(Pernambuco)
	51
	A scene that is repeated many times on the E. de FS Francisco line between @(Alagoinhas) and @(Juazeiro). The locomotive stops due to lack of fuel while the railway employees, helped by 2nd class passengers, gather firewood.
	52
	Picturesque boats that sail the @(S. Francisco) between @(Capim Grosso) and @(Januária). Some carry 30 tons.
	53
	Returning vessels from @(Belém do Pará) arriving at the starting point - @(Porto Nacional) - @(Goiás)
	

Print 14
	54
	Type of steamer that sails the @(S. Francisco) docked in front of the S. Francisco River Transport Company - City of @(Juazeiro) - @(Bahia)
	55
	Boatmen at work - @(São Francisco River) - @(Juazeiro) - @(Bahia)
	56
	Cowboy from the caatingas wearing leather clothing and ready to start work. Resting position. @(Pernambuco).
	57
	Nonagenarian riding - @(Tamanduá) - @(South of Piauí)
	58
	Expedition crossing the headwaters of the @(Rio Preto)
	

Print 15
	59
	Steamer sailing the @(S. Francisco) bringing in tow a vessel loaded with maniçoba and firewood
	60
	Preparations for the passage of the expedition's luggage. Headwaters of @(Rio Pret)o - @(Bahia)
	61
	Tangent of about 70 kilometers, between @(Jaguari) and @(Pitanga) - E. of FS Francisco - @(Bahia)
	62
	Dunes on the banks of @(S. Francisco) - @(Bahia)
	63
	Rare landscape in the crossed landscapes - @(Peixe) - @(Municipality of Remanso) - @(Bahia)
	

Print 16
	64
	Ipuera in @(Jatobá) - Municipality of @(Parnaguá) - @(Piauí)
	65
	@(Middle Island) - @(Parnaguá Lagoon) - @(Piauí)
	66
	@(Lagoa de Parnaguá) - @(Piauí). In the foreground you can see the old anchorage where, just 30 years ago, boats would dock. A photograph that clearly demonstrates the enormous speed with which the lagoon is expected to dry up.
	Print 17
	67
	Panoramic view of the @(Parnaguá lagoon); the largest collection of water between @(Petrolina), in @(Pernambuco), the banks of the @(S. Francisco) and @(Porto Nacional), in @(Tocantins) in @(Goiás).
	

Print 18
	68
	Sandstone rocks where vultures nest, Triatoma braziliensis and Ornithodorus talaje live and develop. @(Caracol) - @(Piauí).
	69
	Confluence of the @(Sapão and Preto rivers) - @(S. Marcelo) - Municipality of @(Santa Rita do Rio Preto) - @(Bahia)
	70
	House of a small farmer (sic) with a roof made of bark wood. Jatobá - Municipality of @(Remanso) - @(Bahia)
	71
	Cassava flour factory - Jatobá - Municipality of @(Remanso) - @(Bahia)
	

Print 19
	72
	Press used in the cassava flour factory - @(Tigre) - Municipality of @(Petrolina) - @(Pernambuco)
	73
	Flour mill; other press system - @(Jatobá) - @(Municipality of Remanso) - @(Bahia)
	74
	Making flour; roasting - @(Jatobá) - @(Municipality of Remanso) - @(Bahia)
	75
	Transporting sugarcane to the mill - @(Caracol) - @(South of Piauí)
	

Print 20
	76
	Sugarcane mill, almost the only type existing in those parts - @(Fazenda do Serrote) - @(Caracol) - @(South of Piauí)
	77
	Melador working to prepare rapadura, the only sugar in the region - @(South of Piauí)
	78
	Spinning mill - @(Peri-peri) - Municipality of @(Santa Rita do Rio Preto) - @(Bahia)
	79
	Loom - @(Peri-peri) - Municipality of @(Santa Rita do Rio Preto) - @(Bahia)
	

Print 21
	80
	Type of cemetery in the villages - @(Peixe) - @(Municipality of Remanso) - @(Bahia)
	81
	The population of a "farm". Jatobá - Municipality of @(Remanso) - @(Bahia)
	82
	Water distribution to residents of @(Itumerim) by the E. de FS Francisco - @(Bahia) career train
	83
	Reproduction of the previous scene at another point on the same railway line in @(Jaguari) - @(Bahia)
	

Print 22
	84
	Lagoon, the only collection of water in the area, and where animals and men drink and bathe - @(Caracol) - @(South of Piauí)
	85
	Section of the @(Rio Piauí) already cut by the drought on 12-5-12. At this time it served as a public laundry and simultaneously as a drinking fountain for men and animals. @(Vila de S. Raimundo Nonato) - @(Piauí).
	86
	Reservoir or tank as they are also called. @(Tamanduá) - @(south of Piauí).
	87
	Comrades working on opening a well to provide water for the camp. Municipality of @(Parnaguá) - @(Piauí).
	

Print 23
	88
	Section of the @(Piauí River) already cut by the drought on 12-5-12. Animals can be seen approaching and the water carrier arriving to fill the barrels intended to supply the inhabitants. @(Vila de São Raimundo Nonato) - @(Piauí).
	89
	Cacimba, in the Bahian town called @(Lago) in a municipality close to Remanso @(Riacho da Casa Nova?). It is the only existing spring; right at the opening you can see two crossed rods that limit the area where the animals drink. The other is for the use of the population.
	90
	Horse with a bad case of hips, there called torce - @(Caracol) - @(South of Piauí).
	91
	Horse attacked by sarcoptosis and called louse in the region. @(Peri-peri) - @(Santa Rita do Rio Preto) - @(Bahia)
	92
	Donkey with osteomalacia. The disease is known by the name of torture. @(Vila do Duro) - @(Goiás)
	

Print 24
	93
	Women suffering from silent attacks; the man is a victim of entrapment. @(Peixe) - Municipality of @(Remanso) - @(Bahia)
	94
	Dwarves - @(Anteater) - @(South of Piauí)
	95
	Woman with goiter - Men suffer from entrapment. @(Peixe) - Municipality of @(Remanso) - @(Piauí)
	96
	Chagas Disease - Municipality of @(Parnaguá) - @(Piauí)
	97
	Group of idiots - @(S. Francisco de Paula Asylum) - @(Capital of Goiás)
	

Print 25
	98
	Boys with goiter; the one with the bare torso and who is sitting is a myxedema patient. - @(Descoberto) - @(Centro de Goiás)
	99
	Carrier of goiter; intelligence little affected.
	100
	Patients diagnosed with Chagas disease - Capital of @(Goiás)
	101
	Cases photographed in the #backlands of @(Amaro Leite) - @(Goiás). People with goiter; rudimentary intelligence and poor articulation of words.
	102
	Group of female patients of all ages. Photograph taken at @(Asilo S. Francisco de Paula) - Capital of @(Goiás) where the patients were identified as representatives of the various clinical modalities described by Chagas and found in @(Minas Gerais).
	

Print 26
	103
	The goiter observed in @(Goiás), although relatively common in both sexes, seems to reach greater development among women who are also more frequently affected. The carrier of the collar goiter is only 12 years old.
	104
	Although uncommon, it is not extremely rare, among men, to have goiter with the development shown in the photograph of a case observed in @(Goiás)
	105
	The size of the goiter is not always related to intellectual depression; the photograph shows a patient with a small mutilated goiter, but with great intellectual inopia.
	106
	The reproduction shows how easy it was to gather a group of women with large goiters. They submitted so easily to the photographic lens because the operator had given them the hope of a radical cure if they would remain calm and away from the mysterious machine that they were seeing for the first time. Center of @(Goiás)
	107
	Goiter sufferer with very low intellectual index. However, he presents regular muscular development. Center of @(Goiás).
	

Print 27
	108
	14-year-old boy; his voice was already suffering from the compression caused by the goiter on the vocal cords. Perfect intelligence. @(Goiás).
	109
	13-year-old girl; little intelligence. The goiter, according to reports, began to grow only 7 years ago. North of @(Goiás).
	110
	Sexagenarian woman with goiter since she was young. North of @(Goiás).
	111
	Carrier of goiter in the same conditions as the previous one, but with full and lively intelligence. @(Duro) - @(Goiás)
	112
	First case of goiter found on the route. @(Formosa) - Municipality of @(Santa Rita do Rio Preto) - @(Bahia)
	

Print 28
	113
	Tumor of probable mycotic origin. It developed on the lower lip, which is fistulous and full of lumps, which when sown on Sabourand media yielded no results.
	114
	He has been ill for 20 years and we found him in the @(Asilo de S. Francisco de Paula) in the capital of @(Goiás). He has a great appetite; his lymph nodes are poorly developed. Photograph 114 shows the case seen from the side.
	115
	Actinomycosis - @(Juazeiro) - @(Bahia)
	116
	Trachoma cases. Municipality of @(S. Raimundo Nonato) - @(South of Piauí)



